I  see with   no  great  surprise  that   the  Times 
Literary   Supplement  devoted  to  him  a  scant 
half  column  of   necrological  pieties  in   which 
there is not a single laudatory epithet that is not 
set  straight   (or   firmly   reprimanded)    by  an 
adverb. The  Spectator,     in  its  corresponding 
number, is less concise, no doubt, and perhaps 
somewhat   more   cordial,    but   it    compares 
Quain's first  book,  The God  of the  Labyrinth, 
with one by Mrs. Agatha Christie,  and others to 
works     by     Gertrude     Stein.     These    are 
comparisons that no one would have thought to 
be inevitable,   and  that  would  have  given  no 
pleasure to the  deceased. Not that  Quain ever 
considered himself "a man of genius" —even on 
those peripatetic nights of  literary  conversation 

241
when the  man  who  by  that  time   had  fagged 
many a printing press invariably played at being 
M. Teste or  Dr.  Samuel Johnson.... Indeed,  he 
saw  with   absolute   clarity   the   experimental 
nature of his  works, which might  be admirable 
for  their  innovativeness  and a  certain  laconic 
integrity,   but    hardly   for   their    strength   of 
passion. "I am like  Cowley's odes," he said in a 
letter to me from Longford  on March 6, 1939. "I 
belong not to  art but  to the  history of  art."  (In 
his  view,  there  was no  lower  discipline   than 
history.) 
    I  have  quoted  Quain's   modest  opinion   of 
himself; naturally,  that  modesty did  not define 
the  boundaries  of  his  thinking.   Flaubert  and 
Henry James have managed to persuade us that 
works  of  art   are  few  and  far   between,  and 
maddeningly   difficult    to   compose,  but    the 
sixteenth century (we should  recall the Voyage 
to Parnassus,    we should  recall  the  career of 
Shakespeare) did  not  share  that  disconsolate 
opinion.  Nor  did  Herbert   Quain. He  believed 
that "great literature"  is the commonest thing in 
the   world,   and    that   there    was  hardly    a 

242
conversation in   the street  that  did  not   attain 
those  "heights."   He   also   believed  that   the 
aesthetic act  must   contain   some element   of 
surprise, shock,  astonishment—and that  being 
astonished by  rote is  difficult,   so he  deplored 
with  smiling   sincerity   "the   servile,  stubborn 
preservation of past and bygone books." ... I do 
not know  whether  that  vague theory  of  his  is 
justifiable  or   not;  I  do   know  that  his  books 
strive too greatly to astonish.  
    I deeply regret  having lent  to a certain  lady, 
irrecoverably,    the    first    book    that    Quain 
published. I   have said  that  it  was a  detective 
story— The  God  of   the  Labyrinth;      what  a 
brilliant  idea the publisher  had, bringing  it  out 
in late November, 1933. In early December, the 
pleasant  yet   arduous    convolutions   of   The 
Siamese Twin Mystery*  gave London and New 
York a good deal of  "gumshoe" work  to do—in 
my view, the failure  of our friend's  work can be 
laid to that  ruinous coincidence. (Though  there 
is  also   the   question—I   wish   to   be  totally 
honest—of its  somewhat careless plotting   and 
the    hollow,    frigid     stiltedness    of    certain 

243
descriptions  of  the  sea.) Seven  years later,  I 
cannot for the life  of me recall the details of the 
plot,  but   this   is   the  general   scheme of   it, 
impoverished (or purified)  by my  forgetfulness: 
There is an  
                    
     
    incomprehensible murder  in  the early pages 
of the  book,  a slow  discussion in   the middle, 
and a  solution   of  the  crime  toward  the  end. 
Once the mystery has been cleared up, there is a 
long retrospective  paragraph that  contains  the 
following sentence: Everyone  believed that the 
chess players   had   meta-accidentally.     That 

244
phrase allows one to infer that the solution  is in 
fact in  error,  and so, uneasy, the  reader looks 
back over the pertinent  chapters and discovers 
another solution,  which  is the correct one. The 
reader of  this  remarkable book,  then,  is more 
perspicacious than the detective.  
    An   even   more    heterodox   work    is   the 
"regressive,  ramifying   fiction"    April    March, 
whose third (and  single) section is  dated 1936. 
No  one,  in   assaying  this  novel,   can  fail   to 
discover  that   it    is  a   kind   of   game;   it   is 
legitimate,  I   should  think,   to  recall  that   the 
author himself never saw it in any other light.  "I 
have reclaimed for this novel," I once heard him 
say, "the essential  features of  every game: the 
symmetry, the arbitrary  laws, the tedium." Even 
the name  is a feeble  pun:  it  is not  someone's 
name,  does  not  mean   "a  march   [taken]   in 
April,"  but literally  April-March.  Someone once 
noted that  there is  an echo of the  doctrines of 
Dunne  in   the   pages  of  this   book;   Quain's 
foreword   prefers   instead  to   allude   to   that 
backward-running  world posited by  Bradley, in 
which death  precedes birth,  the scar  precedes 

245
the wound,  and the  wound  precedes the blow 
(Appearance and Reality,  1897, p. 215).1  
    [1 So much for Herbert  Quain's erudition,  so 
much for page 215 of a book published in 1897. 
The  interlocutor    of    Plato's  Politicus,       the 
unnamed  "Eleatic   Stranger,"   had  described, 
over  two   thousand   years  earlier,   a   similar 
regression, that  of  the  Children  of  Terra,  the 
Autochthons,  who,  under   the  influence   of  a 
reverse rotation  of the  cosmos, grow from  old 
age to  maturity,   from  maturity   to  childhood, 
from childhood  to  extinction  and  nothingness. 
Theopompus, too, in  his  Philippics,   speaks of 
certain  northern   fruits  which   produce in   the 
person  who  eats  them   the  same  retrograde 
growth  —  Even  more  interesting   than  these 
images  is   imagining   an   inversion   of   Time 
itself—a   condition      in    which     we    would 
remember  the  Future  and  know   nothing,   or 
perhaps have  only  the  barest  inkling,   of  the 
Past. Cf. Inferno,  Canto X, II. 97-105» in which 
the     prophetic     vision     is     compared     to 
farsightedness.]  
    But  it  is  not  the worlds  proposed  by  April 

246
March  that   are  regressive, it  is  the  way  the 
stories are told—regressively and ramifying, as I 
have said.  The book  is  composed  of  thirteen 
chapters.   The   first    reports   an   ambiguous 
conversation between several unknown persons 
on a railway  station platform.   The second tells 
of the  events of the  evening that  precedes the 
first. The  third,  likewise retrograde, tells  of the 
events of another,    different,  possible  evening 
before the  first;  the  fourth  chapter  relates the 
events of yet a third  different  possible evening. 
Each of  these (mutually   exclusive) "evenings-
before" ramifies   into  three  further   "evenings-
before,"  all  quite   different.   The  work   in   its 
entirety  consists,  then,   of  nine   novels;  each 
novel, of three long chapters. (The first  chapter 
is common  to  all, of  course.) Of  those novels, 
one    is    symbolic;     another,     supernatural; 
another,      a     detective      novel;      another, 
psychological;  another,   a  Communist   novel; 
another, anti-Communist;   and  so on.  Perhaps 
the following  symbolic  representation will  help 
the reader understand the novel's structure: 
     

247
                               
     
    With   regard  to   this  structure,   it   may  be 
apposite to say once again what Schopenhauer 
said   about   Kant's    twelve   categories:   "He 
sacrifices everything to his rage for  symmetry." 
Predictably, one and another of the nine tales is 
unworthy of  Quain; the best is not the  one that 
Quain first conceived, x ;   it is,  rather, x,  a tale 
of fantasy.  Others  are marred  by  pallid  jokes 
and      instances      of      pointless       pseudo-
exactitude.Those   who    read    the    tales    in 
chronological order (e.g., x , y » z) will  miss the 
strange book's peculiar  flavor.  Two stories— x 
and x   —have no particular individual   value; it 

248
is    their    juxtaposition     that     makes   them 
effective.... I  am not  certain  whether  I  should 
remind  the reader that  after  April   March  was 
published,  Quain  had  second thoughts  about 
the triune  order of the book  and predicted that 
the mortals  who imitated   it  would opt  instead 
for   a  binary    scheme—while  the   gods   and 
demiurges had chosen an infinite   one: infinite 
stories, infinitely branching.  
    Quite  unlike   April    March,      yet  similarly 
retrospective, is the heroic two-act  comedy The 
Secret Mirror.  
    In  the  works  we  have  looked  at  so  far,  a 
formal     complexity     hobbles    the    author's 
imagination;    in   The   Secret  Mirror,        that 
imagination  is given freer  rein. The  play's first 
(and  longer)  act   takes  place in   the  country 
home of   General Thrale,  C.I.E.,  near  Melton 
Mowbray. The unseen center around which  the 
plot revolves is Miss Ulrica Thrale, the general's 
elder  daughter.   Snatches  of  dialog   give   us 
glimpses  of   this   young   woman,  a   haughty 
Amazon-like creature; we are led to suspect that 
she seldom journeys to the realms of literature. 

249
The     newspapers    have     announced     her 
engagement  to   the    duke   of   Rutland;    the 
newspapers then report that  the engagement is 
off. Miss Thrale  is adored by a playwright,  one 
Wilfred  Quarles; once or twice  in the  past, she 
has bestowed a distracted kiss upon this young 
man. The characters possess vast fortunes and 
ancient blood-lines;   their  affections  are noble 
though  vehement;  the  dialog  seems to  swing 
between     the     extremes      of     a      hollow 
grandiloquence  worthy  of  Bulwer-Lytton    and 
the epigrams of Wilde or Philip  Guedalla. There 
is a  nightingale  and a  night;  there  is a  secret 
duel  on  the  terrace.  (Though  almost  entirely 
imperceptible,   there   are   occasional  curious 
contradictions,  and  there  are  sordid   details.) 
The characters of  the first  act  reappear in  the 
second—    under     different       names.     The 
"playwright"   Wilfred    Quarles  is   a   traveling 
salesman from Liverpool; his real  name is John 
William Quigley. Miss Thrale does exist, though 
Quigley has never seen her;  he morbidly   clips 
pictures of her  out of the  Tatler  or the  Sketch. 
Quigley  is   the  author   of   the  first    act;  the 

250
implausible  or  improbable  "country   house" is 
the  Jewish-Irish   rooming   house he  lives   in, 
transformed       and      magnified       by       his 
imagination… 
    The plot of the  two acts is parallel, though in 
the  second everything   is  slightly   menacing—
everything is  put  off,  or frustrated.  When  The 
Secret Mirror    first   opened, critics   spoke the 
names "Freud" and "Julian  Green." In my view, 
the  mention  of   the  first   of  those  is  entirely 
unjustified.   Report   had   it   that   The   Secret 
Mirror   was a Freudian comedy;  that favorable 
(though  fallacious)  reading  decided the  play's 
success.  
    Unfortunately,  Quain was over forty;  he had 
grown used to failure,  and  could not  go gently 
into  that  change of state. He  resolved to  have 
his   revenge.   In    late    1939   he    published 
Statements,   perhaps the  most  original  of  his 
works—certainly  the  least  praised   and  most 
secret of  them.  Quain would  often  argue  that 
readers were  an extinct  species. "There  is  no 
European man  or  woman,"  he would   sputter, 
"that's not  a writer,   potentially  or  in fact."  He 

251
would  also declare that  of  the  many  kinds  of 
pleasure literature  can minister,   the highest  is 
the  pleasure  of   the   imagination.   Since  not 
everyone   is   capable   of    experiencing   that 
pleasure, many will have to content  themselves 
with  simulacra.  For  those  "writers   manques" 
whose name is  legion,  Quain  wrote  the  eight 
stories of Statements.  Each of them prefigures, 
or   promises,   a   good  plot,    which   is   then 
intentionally  frustrated   by  the author.  One  of 
the stories (not the best) hints  at two  plots; the 
reader,  blinded   by   vanity,   believes  that   he 
himself has come up with them.  From the third 
story,  titled   "The  Rose  of  Yesterday,"  I  was 
ingenuous  enough   to   extract  "The   Circular 
Ruins," which  is one of  the stories in  my book 
The Garden of Forking Paths.