On  page 242 of The History  of the World 
War,    Liddell  Hart  tells  us  that  an  Allied 
offensive against the Serre-Montauban line (to 
be mounted by thirteen British divisions backed 
by one thousand four hundred artillery pieces) 
had been planned for July 24, 1916, but had to 
be put  off  until  the morning  of  the twenty-
ninth.  Torrential  rains  (notes  Capt. Liddell 
Hart) were the cause of that delay—a delay that 
entailed no great consequences, as it turns out. 
The statement which follows—dictated, reread, 
and signed by Dr. Yu Tsun, former professor of 
English in the Hochschule at Tsingtao— throws 
unexpected light on  the  case. The two first 
pages of the statement are missing.  
   ...  and I hung up the receiver. Immediately 
afterward, I   recognized the voice  that  had 
answered in  German. It   was that  of  Capt. 
Richard Madden. Madden's presence in Viktor 
Runeberg's flat meant the end of our efforts and 
(though this seemed to me quite secondary, or 

271
should have seemed) our lives as well. It meant 
that Runeberg had been arrested, or murdered.1 
    [1A bizarre and  despicable supposition.  The 
Prussian   spy   Hans   Rabener,   alias    Viktor 
Runeberg, had  turned  an  automatic  pistol  on 
his  arresting  officer,   Capt.  Richard  Madden. 
Madden, in  self-defense, inflicted   the  wounds 
on Rabener that caused his subsequent death. --
- Ed. note.] 
    Before the sun set on  that day,  I would  face 
the  same  fate.   Madden   was  implacable—or 
rather,  he  was obliged   to  be  implacable.  An 
Irishman  at  the orders  of  the  English,  a man 
accused  of   a   certain   lack   of    zealousness, 
perhaps  even treason,   how  could  he  fail   to 
embrace and  give  thanks  for  this  miraculous 
favour—the discovery, capture,  perhaps death, 
of two  agents of  the  German  Empire? I  went 
upstairs  to  my  room;   absurdly,  I  locked  the 
door, and then I threw myself, on my back, onto 
my narrow iron bed.  
    Outside the window  were the usual  rooftops 
and  the  overcast  six  o'clock  sun.  I  found   it 
incredible that  this  day, lacking all  omens and 

272
premonitions,    should   be    the   day   of    my 
implacable death. Despite  my deceased father, 
despite my having been a child in a symmetrical 
garden in Hai  Feng—was I, now, about to  die? 
Then  I   reflected   that   all  things   happen   to 
oneself,  and  happen precisely,  precisely now. 
Century follows  century, yet  events occur only 
in the present;  countless men in the air,  on the 
land and sea, yet everything that truly  happens, 
happens  to   me....     The   almost   unbearable 
memory  of  Madden's horsey  face demolished 
those mental   ramblings.  In   the  midst  of  my 
hatred and my terror  (now I  don't mind  talking 
about terror—now   that  I  have  foiled  Richard 
Madden,  now  that  my  neck  hungers  for   the 
rope), it  occurred to me that  that brawling  and 
undoubtedly happy warrior  did not suspect that 
I possessed the Secret—the name of  the  exact 
location of the  new British  artillery  park on the 
Ancre.  A  bird   furrowed  the  grey  sky,  and  I 
blindly translated  it into  an aeroplane, and that 
aeroplane  into   many   (in    the   French   sky), 
annihilating   the   artillery    park   with   vertical 
bombs.  If   only   my   throat,   before   a  bullet 

273
crushed it, could cry out that name so that it 
might be heard in Germany.... But my human 
voice was so terribly inadequate.  
   How  was I  to  make it  reach the  Leader's 
ear—the ear of that sick and hateful man who 
knew nothing of Runeberg and me save that we 
were in   Staffordshire, and  who  was vainly 
awaiting word from  us  in  his  arid  office in 
Berlin,     poring     infinitely     through     the 
newspapers? ...I must flee,  I said aloud. I sat up 
noiselessly, in needless but perfect silence, as 
though Madden were already just outside my 
door.  
   Something—perhaps the   mere  show   of 
proving that my resources were nonexistent—
made me go through my pockets. I found what I 
knew I  would find:  the American watch, the 
nickel-plated chain and quadrangular coin, the 
key ring  with  the compromising and useless 
keys to Runeberg's flat, the notebook, a letter I 
resolved to destroy at once (and never did), the 
false passport, one crown, two shillings, and a 
few odd  pence, the red-and-blue pencil, the 
handkerchief, the revolver with its single bullet. 

274
Absurdly, I picked it up and hefted it,  to give 
myself courage. I vaguely reflected that a pistol 
shot can be heard at a considerable distance. In 
ten minutes, my plan was ripe. The telephone 
book gave me the name of the only person able 
to communicate the information: he lived in a 
suburb of Fenton, less than a half hour away by 
train. I am a coward. I can say that, now that I 
have carried out a plan whose dangerousness 
and daring no man will deny. I know that it was 
a terrible  thing   to  do. I   did  not  do  it  for 
Germany. What do I care for a barbaric country 
that has forced me to the ignominy of spying?  
   Furthermore, I know of a man of England—a 
modest man—who in my  view  is  no less  a 
genius than Goethe. I spoke with him for  no 
more than an hour, but  for one hour he  was 
Goethe-----No—I did it because I sensed that 
the Leader looked down on the people of my 
race—the countless ancestors whose  blood 
flows through my veins. I wanted to prove to 
him that a yellow man could save his armies. 
And I had to escape from Madden. His hands, 
his voice, could  beat upon  my  door at  any 

275
moment. I  silently  dressed, said goodbye to 
myself in the mirror, made my way downstairs, 
looked up and down the quiet street, and set off. 
The train station was not far from my flat, but I 
thought it better to take a cab. I argued that I 
ran less chance of being recognized that way; 
the fact is, I felt I was visible and vulnerable—
infinitely vulnerable—in the deserted street. I 
recall that I told the driver to stop a little ways 
from the  main entrance to the  station. I  got 
down from  the  cab with   willed and  almost 
painful slowness. I would be going to the village 
of Ash grove, but I bought a ticket for a station 
farther down the line. The train was to leave at 
eight-fifty, scant minutes away. I had to hurry; 
the next train  would not be until  nine-thirty. 
There was almost no one on the  platform. I 
walked  through  the   cars;  I   recall  a   few 
workmen,  a  woman  dressed  in   mourning 
weeds, a young man fervently reading Tacit us' 
Annals,     and  a   cheerful-looking wounded 
soldier. The train pulled out at  last. A man I 
recognised ran, vainly, out to the  end of the 
platform;   it   was   Capt.  Richard   Madden. 

276
Shattered, trembling, I huddled on  the other 
end of the seat, far from the feared window.  
   From  that  shattered state I  passed into a 
state of almost abject cheerfulness. I told myself 
that my duel had begun, and that in dodging my 
adversary's thrust—even by forty minutes, even 
thanks to the slightest smile from fate—the first 
round had gone to me. I argued that this small 
win prefigured total victory. I  argued that the 
win was not really even so small, since without 
the precious hour that the trains had given me, 
I'd  be  in  gaol,  or  dead. I   argued (no  less 
sophistically) that  my  cowardly cheerfulness 
proved that I was a man capable of following 
this adventure through to  its  successful end. 
From that weakness I drew strength that was 
never to abandon me. I foresee that mankind 
will resign itself more and more fully every day 
to more  and more horrendous undertakings; 
soon there will  be nothing  but warriors  and 
brigands. I give them this piece of advice: He 
who is  to  perform a  horrendous act  should 
imagine to  himself  that  it  is  already  done, 
should  impose  upon  himself  a   future   as 

277
irrevocable as the past.  
    That is what I did,  while my eyes—the eyes of 
a man already dead—registered the flow of that 
day perhaps to be my last, and the spreading of 
the night. The train  ran sweetly, gently, through 
woods of ash  trees. It  stopped virtually   in  the 
middle of the countryside. No one called out the 
name of the station.  
    "Ashgrove?"  I    asked  some   boys  on   the 
platform.  "Ashgrove," they said, nodding.  I  got 
off the train.  
    A  lamp  illuminated    the  platform,   but  the 
boys' faces remained within the area of shadow. 
"Are you going to  Dr. Stephen Albert's  house?" 
one queried.  Without   waiting   for  an  answer, 
another of them  said: "The  house is a far  way, 
but  you'll  not  get lost  if  you  follow  that  road 
there to the left, and turn  left at every crossing." 
I tossed them a coin (my last), went down some 
stone steps, and started down the solitary road. 
It  ran   ever  so  slightly  downhill   and   was of 
elemental dirt.  Branches tangled overhead, and 
the  low  round   moon  seemed  to  walk   along 
beside me.  

278
   For   one  instant,   I   feared that   Richard 
Madden  had   somehow seen  through   my 
desperate plan, but I soon realized that that was 
impossible. The boy's advice to turn always to 
the left reminded me that that was the common 
way of discovering the central lawn of a certain 
type of maze. I am something of a connoisseur 
of  mazes: not for   nothing am  I   the  great-
grandson of that Ts'ui Pen who was governor of 
Yunan  province   and   who   renounced  all 
temporal power  in  order   to  write  a  novel 
containing more characters than the Hung Lu 
Meng and construct a labyrinth  in  which all 
men would lose their way. Ts'ui Pen devoted 
thirteen years to those disparate labours, but 
the hand of a foreigner murdered him and his 
novel made no sense and no one ever found the 
labyrinth. It   was under English  trees that  I 
meditated on that lost labyrinth: I  pictured it 
perfect and inviolate on the secret summit of a 
mountain; I pictured its outlines blurred by rice 
paddies, or   underwater;  I    pictured  it    as 
infinite—a labyrinth not of octagonal pavillions 
and paths that turn back upon themselves, but 

279
of  rivers   and   provinces  and   kingdoms-----I 
imagined  a labyrinth   of  labyrinths,   amaze of 
mazes,  a    twisting,    turning,     ever-widening 
labyrinth  that  contained  both  past and  future 
and somehow  implied   the stars.  Absorbed  in 
those illusory  imaginings, I  forgot  that I  was a 
pursued man;   I  felt  myself,  for  an  indefinite 
while, the abstract perceiver of the world.  
    The vague, living countryside,  the moon, the 
remains of the day did their  work  in me; so did 
the gently downward road, which  forestalled all 
possibility  of weariness. The evening was near, 
yet infinite.  
    The  road   dropped   and  forked   as   it   cut 
through  the  now-formless   meadows.  A  keen 
and vaguely syllabic song, blurred by leaves and 
distance, rain, and I went on the  gentle mists of 
breeze. I was struck by the  thought that  a man 
may be the enemy of  other men,  the enemy of 
other  men's  other   moments,  yet  not  be  the 
enemy of a country—of fireflies, words, gardens, 
water-courses,  zephyrs.  It   was  amidst   such 
thoughts  that   I  came  to   a  high  rusty   gate. 
Through the iron  bars I  made out a drive  lined 

280
with   poplars,  and   a  gazebo  of   some  kind. 
Suddenly, I realised two things—the first trivial, 
the second almost  incredible:  the music  I  had 
heard   was   coming   from    that    gazebo,  or 
pavillion, and  the music was Chinese. That was 
why unconsciously I had fully  given myself over 
to it. I  do not recall  whether there was a bell or 
whether I  had  to  clap my  hands to  make  my 
arrival known.  
    The sputtering   of the  music  continued,  but 
from  the rear  of the  intimate  house, a lantern 
was making its way toward me—a lantern cross-
hatched and  sometimes blotted  out  altogether 
by the  trees,  a  paper  lantern  the  shape of  a 
drum and the colour of the moon. It  was carried 
by a tall  man. I  could not  see his face because 
the light  blinded  me.  He opened the  gate and 
slowly spoke to me in my own language.  
    "I  see that the compassionate Hsi  P'eng has 
undertaken to remedy my  solitude. You will  no 
doubt wish to see the garden?"  
    I recognised the name of one of  our consuls, 
but  I  could   only  disconcertedly  repeat,  "The 
garden?"  

281
    "The garden of forking paths."  
    Something  stirred   in   my   memory,  and   I 
spoke with incomprehensible assurance.  
    "The garden of my ancestor Ts'ui Pen."  
    "Your ancestor? Your illustrious ancestor?” 
    “Please—come in."  
    The dew-drenched  path meandered like  the 
paths of my childhood.  We came to a library  of 
Western  and   Oriental   books.   I   recognised, 
bound   in   yellow    silk,   several   handwritten 
volumes of the  Lost Encyclopedia compiled  by 
the third  emperor of the Luminous Dynasty but 
never  printed.  The  disk   on  the  gramophone 
revolved near a bronze phoenix.  I  also recall a 
vase of   famillerose   and  another,   earlier   by 
several hundred years, of  that  blue colour  our 
artificers  copied  from   the  potters   of  ancient 
Persia-----Stephen    Albert,     with     a    smile, 
regarded me. He was, as I have said, quite tall, 
with sharp features, grey eyes, and a grey beard. 
There  was  something  priest-like   about   him, 
somehow, but   something   sailor-like  as  well; 
later he  told  me he  had been a  missionary  in 
Tien-tsin "before aspiring to be a Sinologist."  

282
    We sat down, I  on a long low  divan, he with 
his back to the window and a tall  circular clock. 
I  figured  that   my  pursuer,  Richard  Madden, 
could not  possibly  arrive  for at  least an  hour. 
My irrevocable decision could wait.  
    "An amazing life, Ts'ui Pen's," Stephen Albert 
said. "Governor of the province in which  he had 
been  born,    a  man   learned   in    astronomy, 
astrology, and the unwearying interpretation   of 
canonical books,  a  chess player,  a  renowned 
poet and  calligraphier—he abandoned it  all  in 
order to  compose a  book and  a labyrinth.   He 
renounced the pleasures of oppression, justice, 
the populous marriage bed, banquets, and even 
erudition   in   order   to  sequester  himself   for 
thirteen   years   in   the   Pavillion    of   Limpid 
Solitude.  Upon   his   death,   his   heirs   found 
nothing but chaotic manuscripts.  The family, as 
you perhaps  are aware, were  about  to deliver 
them to the fire,  but his counsellor—a Taoist or 
Buddhist    monk—insisted    upon    publishing 
them."  
    "To   this   day,"   I    replied,   "we   who   are 
descended from Ts'ui  Pen execrate that monk. 

283
It was senseless to publish those manuscripts. 
The book is a contradictory jumble of irresolute 
drafts. I once examined it myself; in the third 
chapter the hero dies, yet in the fourth  he is 
alive again. As for Ts'ui Pen's other labor, his 
Labyrinth ..."  
   "Here    is   the   Labyrinth,"    Albert   said, 
gesturing towards  a   tall  lacquered  writing 
cabinet.  
   "An  ivory  labyrinth!"  I  exclaimed. "A very 
small sort of labyrinth ..."  
   "A  labyrinth of  symbols," he corrected me. 
"An invisible labyrinth  of time.  I,  an English 
barbarian, have somehow been chosen to unveil 
the diaphanous mystery. Now, more  than  a 
hundred years after the fact, the precise details 
are irrecoverable, but   it  is  not   difficult   to 
surmise what happened. Ts'ui Pen must at one 
point have remarked, 'I shall retire to write  a 
book,' and at another point,  'I  shall retire to 
construct a labyrinth.' Everyone pictured two 
projects; it occurred to no one that book and 
labyrinth were one and the same. The Pavillion 
of Limpid Solitude was erected in the centre of 

284
a garden that was, perhaps, most intricately laid 
out;  that   fact   might   well  have  suggested  a 
physical labyrinth.  Ts'ui Pen died; no one in  all 
the wide lands that  had been his could find  the 
labyrinth. The novel's confusion—confusedness, 
I mean, of  course—suggested to me that it was 
that labyrinth.   Two circumstances lent  me  the 
final solution  of  the problem—one, the curious 
legend that Ts'ui Pen had intended to construct 
a labyrinth  which was truly  infinite,  and  two, a 
fragment of a letter I discovered."  
    Albert  stood. His back was turned  to me  for 
several moments;  he opened  a drawer  in   the 
black-and-gold writing  cabinet. He turned  back 
with  a paper that  had  once been crimson  but 
was now pink  and  delicate and  rectangular. It 
was    written      in     Ts'ui     Pen's    renowned 
calligraphy.  Eagerly yet  uncomprehendingly   I 
read the words  that  a man  of my  own lineage 
had written   with  painstaking  brushstrokes:    I 
leave to several futures  (not to  all)  my garden 
of forking  paths.  I wordlessly handed the paper 
back to Albert. He continued:  
    "Before    unearthing    this     letter,    I     had 

285
wondered how  a  book  could  be  infinite.   The 
only  way  I   could  surmise  was  that   it   be  a 
cyclical, or  circular,   volume,  a volume  whose 
last page would be identical to  the first,  so that 
one might go on indefinitely.  I also recalled that 
night at the centre of the 1001 Nights,  when the 
queen  Scheherazade (through   some  magical 
distractedness on the part of the copyist) begins 
to retell, verbatim,  the story of the 1001 Nights, 
with  the  risk   of  returning   once again  to  the 
night on  which  she is telling  it—and so on,  ad 
infinitum.    I also pictured  to myself  a platonic, 
hereditary  sort   of  work,   passed  down  from 
father  to  son,  in  which   each new  individual 
would  add  a   chapter  or   with   reverent  care 
correct  his   elders'   pages. These  imaginings 
amused and distracted  me,  but  none of  them 
seemed to  correspond even  remotely  to  Ts'ui 
Pen's   contradictory     chapters.    As    I    was 
floundering    about    in    the   mire    of    these 
perplexities,   I   was   sent   from    Oxford   the 
document you have just examined. I paused, as 
you may well imagine, at the sentence 'I leave to 
several futures (not to all)  my garden of forking 

286
paths.'  
    Almost  instantly,   I   saw  it—the   garden  of 
forking paths was the chaotic novel;  the phrase 
'several futures  (not  all)'  suggested to  me the 
image of a forking in time,  rather than in  space. 
A  full   rereading  of   the  book  confirmed   my 
theory. In  all  fictions,  each time  a  man meets 
diverse   alternatives,   he    chooses  one    and 
eliminates   the  others;   in   the   work   of   the 
virtually   impossible-to-disentangle   Ts'ui  Pen, 
the character  chooses— simultaneously—all of 
them.  He  creates,    thereby,  'several futures,' 
several times,  which themselves proliferate and 
fork.  That  is  the  explanation   for  the   novel's 
contradictions. Fang, let  us say, has a secret; a 
stranger knocks at his door; Fang decides to kill 
him.   Naturally,    there   are   various   possible 
outcomes—Fang can   kill    the   intruder,    the 
intruder  can kill  Fang, they can both  live, they 
can both  be  killed,  and  so on.  In  Ts'ui  Pen's 
novel, all the outcomes in fact occur; each is the 
starting point  for further  bifurcations. Once in a 
while, the paths  of that  labyrinth  converge: for 
example, you come to this house, but  in one of 

287
the possible pasts you are my enemy, in another 
my  friend.   If   you  can  bear  my   incorrigible 
pronunciation, we shall read a few pages."  
    His face, in  the vivid  circle of  the lamp, was 
undoubtedly  that of  an old   man, though  with 
something   indomitable    and   even  immortal 
about  it.   He   read  with   slow   precision  two 
versions of a single epic chapter. In the first, an 
army marches off to battle  through a mountain 
wilderness;   the   horror     of   the   rocks    and 
darkness inspires in them a disdain for  life, and 
they go on to an easy victory. In the second, the 
same army passes through a palace in which  a 
ball is being  held; the  brilliant   battle seems to 
them a continuation  of the fête,  and they win it 
easily.  
    I   listened  with    honourable  veneration   to 
those ancient  fictions,  which  were  themselves 
perhaps not  as remarkable   as the  fact  that  a 
man of my blood had invented them  and a man 
of a distant empire was restoring them to me on 
an  island   in   the  West   in   the  course  of   a 
desperate mission.   I   recall  the   final   words, 
repeated  in   each  version   like   some   secret 

288
commandment: "Thus  the  heroes fought, their 
admirable  hearts  calm,  their   swords  violent, 
they  themselves  resigned   to   killing   and   to 
dying."  
    From that moment  on, I felt all about me and 
within  my obscure body an invisible, intangible 
pullulation—not  that  of the  divergent, parallel, 
and finally  coalescing armies,  but an  agitation 
more inaccessible, more  inward  than  that,  yet 
one those  armies somehow  prefigured.  Albert 
went on: 
    "I do not believe that your venerable ancestor 
played  at  idle   variations.   I   cannot  think    it 
probable that  he would sacrifice  thirteen  years 
to  the   infinite    performance   of  a   rhetorical 
exercise.  In   your   country,    the   novel   is   a 
subordinate genre;  at that  time  it  was a genre 
beneath contempt. Ts'ui  Pen was a novelist  of 
genius, but  he was also  a man  of  letters, and 
surely  would  not   have  considered  himself  a 
mere novelist.  
    The    testimony     of    his     contemporaries 
proclaims his metaphysical, mystical  leanings—
and   his   life   is    their   fullest    confirmation. 

289
Philosophical debate consumes a  good part  of 
his novel.  I   know  that  of  all  problems,  none 
disturbed  him,  none  gnawed  at  him  like  the 
unfathomable  problem  of  time.  How  strange, 
then, that that  problem should  be the only  one 
that does not figure in  the pages of his Garden. 
He  never  even uses  the  word.   How  do  you 
explain that willful  omission?"  
    I        proposed        several       solutions—all 
unsatisfactory.   We   discussed  them;   finally, 
Stephen Albert said: 
    "In  a riddle   whose answer is  chess, what is 
the only word that must not be used?"  
    I thought  for a moment.  
    "The word chess,' " I replied.  
    "Exactly,"    Albert   said.    "The   Garden   of 
Forking   Paths  is  a  huge  riddle,   or  parable, 
whose  subject  is   time;   that   secret  purpose 
forbids  Ts'ui  Pen  the   merest  mention  of   its 
name. To  always   omit  one  word,  to  employ 
awkward         metaphors        and         obvious 
circumlocutions,  is perhaps the most  emphatic 
way of calling  attention   to  that word.  It   is. at 
any  rate,   the  tortuous   path   chosen  by  the 

290
devious Ts'ui Pen at  each and every one of the 
turnings   of  his   inexhaustible   novel.   I   have 
compared  hundreds   of  manuscripts,   I   have 
corrected  the  errors   introduced   through  the 
negligence  of    copyists,   I   have   reached   a 
hypothesis for  the  plan  of  that  chaos, I   have 
reestablished, or  believe I've  reestablished, its 
fundamental order—I have translated the entire 
work; and  I know  that not  once does the word 
'time'  appear. The explanation  is obvious:  The 
Garden of Forking  Paths is  an incomplete, but 
not false, image of the universe as conceived by 
Ts'ui Pen.  Unlike  Newton  and  Schopenhauer, 
your ancestor did  not believe in  a uniform  and 
absolute time;  he believed in  an infinite   series 
of times, a growing,  dizzying web of  divergent, 
convergent, and  parallel  times.  That  fabric  of 
times  that   approach  one   another,  fork,   are 
snipped   off,   or    are   simply    unknown    for 
centuries, contains all  possibilities.  In  most  of 
those times, we do not exist; in  some, you exist 
but I  do not; in  others, I  do and you do not;  in 
others still,  we both  do. In  this one, which  the 
favouring  hand  of  chance  has dealt  me,  you 

291
have come to my  home; in  another,  when you 
come through my  garden you find  me dead; in 
another, I  say these same words,  but I  am  an 
error, a ghost."  
    "In  all," I  said, not  without  a tremble, "I  am 
grateful for,  and I  venerate, your  recreation of 
the garden of Ts'ui Pen."  
    "Not   in  all,"   he  whispered   with   a  smile. 
"Time forks, perpetually,  into countless futures. 
In one of them, I am your enemy."  
    I    felt     again    that    pullulation     I     have 
mentioned.  I   sensed  that  the   dew-drenched 
garden   that     surrounded    the    house    was 
saturated,  infinitely,    with    invisible   persons. 
Those persons were Albert  and myself—secret, 
busily at work, multiform—in   other dimensions 
of  time.  I  raised  my   eyes and  the  gossamer 
nightmare    faded.   In    the    yellow-and-black 
garden there  was but   a single  man—but  that 
man was as mighty  as a  statue, and that  man 
was coming down  the  path, and  he was  Capt. 
Richard Madden.  
    "The future  is with  us,"  I  replied, "but  I  am 
your friend. May I look  at the letter again?"  

292
    Albert  rose once again.  He  stood tall  as he 
opened the drawer of the tall writing cabinet; he 
turned  his  back  to  me  for  a  moment.  I  had 
cocked the revolver. With   utmost care, I  fired. 
Albert fell without  a groan, without  a sound, on 
the instant.  I swear that  he died instantly—one 
clap of thunder.  
    The  rest   is  unreal,   insignificant.   Madden 
burst  into  the  room  and  arrested me.  I  have 
been   sentenced   to     hang.    I    have    most 
abhorrently  triumphed:   I  have communicated 
to  Berlin   the  secret  name  of  the  city  to   be 
attacked.  Yesterday  it   was   bombed—I  read 
about it  in the  same newspapers that posed to 
all of England  the enigma of the murder  of  the 
eminent    Sinologist    Stephen   Albert    by    a 
stranger, Yu Tsun. The Leader solved the riddle. 
He knew  that  my problem  was  how to  report 
(over the deafening noise of the war)  the name 
of the city named Albert, and that the only way I 
could  find   was  murdering   a  person  of   that 
name. He does not know (no one can know) my 
endless contrition, and my weariness.  