And if he left off dreaming about you ... ? 
Through the Looking-Glass,  VI  
 
    No  one saw  him  slip  from  the  boat  in  the 
unanimous  night,   no   one  saw   the  bamboo 
canoe as it sank  into  the sacred mud,  and yet 
within  days there was no one who did not know 
that the taciturn  man  had come there from  the 
South, and that his  homeland was one of those 
infinite  villages that  lie up-river,  on the  violent 
flank  of the  mountain,  where  the  language of 
the  Zend   is  uncontaminated   by   Greek  and 
where leprosy  is  uncommon.   But  in  fact  the 
gray man had kissed the mud, scrambled up the 
steep bank   (without   pushing  back,  probably 
without     even     feeling,     the     sharp-leaved 
bulrushes that  slashed his  flesh), and  dragged 
himself,   faint    and   bloody,   to   the   circular 
enclosure, crowned  by  the   stone  figure  of  a 
horse or tiger, which had once been the color of 
fire but  was now  the color  of  ashes. That ring 
was a temple devoured by an ancient holocaust; 

215
now, the malarial jungle had profaned  it and its 
god went unhonored by mankind. The foreigner 
lay down at the foot of the pedestal.  
    He was awakened by the sun high in the sky. 
He  examined  his   wounds  and  saw,  without 
astonishment, that  they  had healed;  he closed 
his pale eyes and slept, not out of any weakness 
of the flesh but out  of willed  determination.  He 
knew that  this   temple  was the  place that  his 
unconquerable plan called for; he knew that the 
unrelenting    trees    had    not    succeeded   in 
strangling   the   ruins    of   another   promising 
temple  downriver—like  this  one,  a  temple  to 
dead,  incinerated    gods;  he   knew   that   his 
immediate   obligation    was  to    sleep.  About 
midnight  he was awakened by the inconsolable 
cry of a bird.  Prints  of  unshod feet, a few figs, 
and a jug of water told  him that  the men of the 
region had respectfully spied upon his sleep and 
that they sought  his favor, or  feared his magic. 
He felt the coldness of fear, and he sought out a 
tomblike niche in  the crumbling  wall, where he 
covered himself with unknown leaves.  
    The goal that led him  on was not impossible, 

216
though it  was clearly  supernatural:  He wanted 
to  dream  a  man.  He  wanted   to  dream  him 
completely, in   painstaking  detail,  and  impose 
him  upon  reality.  This  magical  objective  had 
come to  fill   his  entire   soul;  if  someone  had 
asked him his  own name, or  inquired  into  any 
feature of  his life  till  then,  he would  not  have 
been  able  to   answer.  The  uninhabited    and 
crumbling   temple  suited   him,   for   it   was  a 
minimum  of visible world;  so did the  proximity 
of the  woodcutters,  for they  saw to  his  frugal 
needs. The rice and  fruit  of  their  tribute  were 
nourishment  enough  for  his body,  which  was 
consecrated to  the  sole  task  of  sleeping  and 
dreaming.  
    At  first,   his  dreams  were  chaotic;   a  little 
later,  they  became  dialectical.   The  foreigner 
dreamed that he was in the  center of a circular 
amphitheater,  which was  somehow the ruined 
temple; clouds  of taciturn  students  completely 
filled  the terraces  of  seats. The faces of  those 
farthest away hung at many  centuries' distance 
and at a cosmic height, yet they were absolutely 
clear.    The    man     lectured     on    anatomy, 

217
cosmography,    magic;    the     faces   listened 
earnestly, intently,   and  attempted  to  respond 
with understanding—as though they sensed the 
importance   of    that    education   that    would 
redeem one of  them  from  his  state  of hollow 
appearance and insert him  into  the real world. 
The  man,   both   in   sleep  and  when   awake, 
pondered his  phantasms'  answers; he did  not 
allow himself  to be taken  in by impostors,  and 
he  sensed in   certain   perplexities  a   growing 
intelligence. He  was  seeking a soul  worthy  of 
taking its place in the universe.  
    On the ninth  or tenth night,  he realized (with 
some bitterness) that nothing could be expected 
from those students who passively accepted his 
teachings,  but   only   from   those  who   might 
occasionally, in  a  reasonable way, venture  an 
objection.   The    first—the   accepting—though 
worthy of  affection  and a  degree of sympathy, 
would never emerge as individuals;  the latter— 
those  who  sometimes  questioned—had a   bit 
more préexistence. One  afternoon  (afternoons 
now paid their  tribute  to sleep as well; now the 
man  was awake  no  more  than  two   or  three 

218
hours around  daybreak) he  dismissed the vast 
illusory classroom once and for all and retained 
but  a single  pupil—a  taciturn,   sallow-skinned 
young  man,  at  times  intractable,   with   sharp 
features  that  echoed  those  of  the   man  that 
dreamed him.  The pupil   was not disconcerted 
for  long by  the  elimination   of his  classmates; 
after  only   a  few  of   the  private   classes, his 
progress amazed his teacher. Yet disaster would 
not be  forestalled.  One day the  man  emerged 
from  sleep  as though  from   a  viscous desert, 
looked up  at  the  hollow   light  of  the  evening 
(which for a moment  he confused with the light 
of dawn), and realized that he had not dreamed. 
All that  night and  the next day, the unbearable 
lucidity  of insomnia  harried  him,  like  a hawk. 
He went off to explore the jungle, hoping  to tire 
himself;  among the  hemlocks  he managed no 
more  than   a  few   intervals   of   feeble  sleep, 
fleetingly veined  with the  most rudimentary   of 
visions—useless to  him.   He   reconvened  his 
class, but no sooner had he spoken a  few brief 
words  of  exhortation  than   the  faces blurred, 
twisted, and faded away.  

219
    In his  almost perpetual state of wakefulness, 
tears of anger burned the man's old eyes.  
    He understood  that  the task  of molding  the 
incoherent  and dizzying  stuff  that  dreams are 
made of  is the  most difficult   work  a  man can 
undertake, even if he fathom all  the enigmas of 
the  higher  and   lower  spheres— much   more 
difficult  than weaving a rope of sand or minting 
coins of the  faceless wind. He understood that 
initial  failure   was inevitable.  He  swore to  put 
behind him  the  vast hallucination   that  at first 
had drawn   him  off  the  track,  and  he  sought 
another  way to  approach  his  task.  Before  he 
began, he devoted  a month   to recovering  the 
strength   his   delirium    had   squandered.  He 
abandoned all premeditation  of  dreaming, and 
almost  instantly  managed  to  sleep  for  a  fair 
portion of  the day. The few times he did dream 
during  this   period,  he  did   not  focus  on  his 
dreams; he would wait to take up his task again 
until the disk of the moon was whole. Then, that 
evening, he purified himself in  the waters of the 
river,   bowed   down   to   the   planetary   gods, 
uttered those syllables of a powerful  name that 

220
it is lawful  to pronounce, and laid himself  down 
to  sleep.  Almost  immediately   he  dreamed  a 
beating heart.  
    He dreamed the heart  warm, active, secret—
about the size of a  closed fist, a garnet-colored 
thing inside  the dimness of a human  body that 
was still   faceless and sexless; he  dreamed  it, 
with   painstaking  love,   for   fourteen  brilliant 
nights. Each night  he perceived it  with  greater 
clarity, greater certainty. He did  not touch it; he 
only  witnessed  it,   observed  it,   corrected   it, 
perhaps, with his eyes. He perceived it, he lived 
it,  from  many angles, many  distances. On  the 
fourteenth   night,  he   stroked  the   pulmonary 
artery with   his forefinger,  and  then  the entire 
heart, inside and out.  And his  inspection made 
him  proud.  He  deliberately  did  not  sleep the 
next night;   then  he  took  up  the  heart  again, 
invoked  the name  of  a planet,  and  set  about 
dreaming another  of the  major  organs. Before 
the year was out  he had reached the  skeleton, 
the eyelids.  
    The countless hairs of the body were perhaps 
the most difficult  task. The man had dreamed a 

221
fully  fleshed  man—a stripling—but  this   youth 
did not stand  up or speak, nor could it  open its 
eyes. Night  after night,   the man  dreamed  the 
youth asleep.  
    In   the  cosmogonies  of   the  Gnostics,   the 
demiurges knead  up a  red  Adam  who cannot 
manage  to   stand;   as  rude   and   inept   and 
elementary as that Adam of dust was the Adam 
of dream  wrought  from   the  sorcerer's nights. 
One afternoon,  the  man  almost destroyed  his 
creation, but he could not bring  himself to do it. 
(He'd  have  been better   off  if  he  had.)  After 
making vows to all  the deities  of the earth  and 
the river, he threw himself  at the feet of the idol 
that was perhaps  a tiger or perhaps a colt, and 
he begged for its  untried  aid.  That evening, at 
sunset, the   statue  filled   his  dreams.   In  the 
dream it  was  alive, and  trembling—yet  it  was 
not  the  dread-inspiring  hybrid   form  of  horse 
and tiger it  had been. It was, instead, those two 
vehement creatures  plus  bull,   and  rose,  and 
tempest, too—and all that, simultaneously.  The 
manifold   god  revealed  to   the  man   that   its 
earthly name was Fire, and that in  that circular 

222
temple  (and   others  like   it)   men  had   made 
sacrifices and worshiped  it,  and  that  it  would 
magically bring  to  life  the  phantasm  the man 
had dreamed—so fully   bring  him   to  life  that 
every creature, save Fire itself and the man who 
dreamed him, would take him for  a man of flesh 
and blood. Fire ordered the dreamer to send the 
youth, once instructed in the  rites, to that other 
ruined   temple   whose   pyramids   still    stood 
downriver, so that a voice might  glorify  the god 
in that  deserted place.  In  the dreaming  man's 
dream, the dreamed man awoke.  
    The sorcerer  carried out  Fire's  instructions. 
He consecrated a period  of time  (which  in  the 
end encompassed two full years) to revealing to 
the youth  the  arcana of  the  universe  and the 
secrets of the cult of Fire. Deep inside, it grieved 
the man to  separate himself from  his creation. 
Under  the pretext of  pedagogical necessity, he 
drew out the hours of  sleep more every day. He 
also  redid    the   right   shoulder    (which   was 
perhaps defective). From  time  to time,  he was 
disturbed by a sense that all this  had happened 
before-----His   days  were,  in  general,  happy; 

223
when he closed his eyes, he would think Now  I 
will  be with  my  son.   Or,  less frequently,  The 
son I have engendered  is waiting   for me,  and 
he will not exist if I  do not go to him.  
    Gradually, the man  accustomed the youth to 
reality. Once he  ordered him  to set a flag on  a 
distant  mountaintop.   The  next   day,  the  flag 
crackled on  the  summit.  He  attempted  other, 
similar   experiments—each more  daring   than 
the last.  He saw with  some bitterness  that  his 
son was ready— perhaps even impatient—to be 
born.  That  night   he kissed  him   for  the  first 
time, then  sent him  off, through  many leagues 
of impenetrable jungle, many leagues of swamp, 
to that  other  temple  whose  ruins  bleached in 
the sun downstream.  But first  (so that  the son 
would never know  that  he was a phantasm, so 
that he would  believe himself  to be a man  like 
other men) the  man infused in  him a total  lack 
of memory of his years of education.  
    The man's victory, and his peace, were dulled 
by the wearisome sameness of his days. In  the 
twilight   hours  of  dusk   and  dawn,  he  would 
prostrate   himself    before   the   stone   figure, 

224
imagining    perhaps    that     his    unreal    son 
performed  identical   rituals   in   other   circular 
ruins, downstream.  At night  he did not  dream, 
or dreamed the dreams that all men dream. His 
perceptions of the universe's sounds and shapes 
were  somewhat   pale:   the   absent   son  was 
nourished by those diminutions  of his soul.  His 
life's  goal  had  been  accomplished;   the  man 
lived on now in  a sort of ecstasy. After a period 
of time (which  some tellers of  the story choose 
to  compute in   years, others  in  decades), two 
rowers woke the man at midnight. He  could not 
see their faces, but  they told  him  of  a magical 
man in a temple in the  North, a man who could 
walk on fire and not be burned.  
    The sorcerer suddenly remembered the god's 
words. He remembered that of all  the creatures 
on the earth,  Fire was the  only  one who knew 
that his son was a phantasm. That recollection, 
comforting  at first,  soon came to torment  him. 
He feared that his son would meditate  upon his 
unnatural privilege  and somehow discover that 
he was a mere  simulacrum.  To be  not a  man, 
but  the  projection  of  another  man's  dream—

225
what incomparable   humiliation,   what  vertigo! 
Every parent feels  concern for  the children  he 
has procreated (or allowed to be procreated)  in 
happiness or  in   mere  confusion;  it  was  only 
natural  that  the  sorcerer  should  fear  for   the 
future  of  the  son he  had  conceived organ  by 
organ, feature  by feature,  through  a thousand 
and one secret nights.  
    The end  of his  meditations  came  suddenly, 
but it  had  been foretold  by certain  signs: first 
(after a long  drought),  a distant cloud,  as light 
as a bird, upon a mountaintop; then, toward the 
South, the sky  the pinkish  color  of a leopard's 
gums; then the clouds of smoke that rusted  the 
iron  of  the nights;  then,  at  last, the  panicked 
flight   of   the   animals—for   that    which   had 
occurred  hundreds   of   years  ago  was  being 
repeated now. The ruins of the sanctuary of the 
god  of  Fire   were  destroyed  by   fire.  In   the 
birdless   dawn,    the   sorcerer    watched   the 
concentric holocaust  close  in  upon  the  walls. 
For a moment he thought of taking refuge in the 
water, but then he realized that  death would be 
a crown upon his age and absolve him from his 

226
labors. He walked into  the tatters  of flame, but 
they did  not  bite his  flesh—they caressed him, 
bathed    him     without     heat    and    without 
combustion. With  relief, with  humiliation,   with 
terror,   he   realized   that   he,   too,   was   but 
appearance, that  another  man  was  dreaming 
him.  