Tlön,  Uqbar,   Orbis   Tertius 
     
    I. 
    I    owe   the   discovery   of   Uqbar    to   the 
conjunction  of  a mirror   and  an  encyclopedia. 
The mirror  troubled  the far end of  a hallway in 
a large country house on Calle Gaona, in Ramos 
Mejia*;  the  encyclopedia is misleadingly  titled 
The Anglo-American   Cyclopaedia (New  York, 
1917), and is  a literal   (though  also  laggardly) 
reprint  of  the 1902  Encyclopœdia Britannica. 
The event took place about five years ago.  

146
    Bioy  Casares *had  come  to   dinner  at  my 
house that evening, and we had lost all track  of 
time in a vast debate over the way one might go 
about  composing  a  first-person   novel  whose 
narrator   would   omit   or   distort    things  and 
engage in all  sorts of  contradictions,  so that  a 
few of  the  book's readers—a very  few—might 
divine  the horrifying   or  banal  truth.  Down  at 
that far end of  the hallway, the mirror  hovered, 
shadowing us. We discovered (very late at night 
such a  discovery  is   inevitable)  that   there  is 
something monstrous  about mirrors.   That was 
when Bioy remembered a saying  by one of the 
heresiarchs of Uqbar:  Mirrors   and  copulation 
are abominable,  for they  multiply   the number 
of  mankind.    I   asked him   where  he'd  come 
across that memorable epigram, and he told me 
it    was   recorded   in    The    Anglo-American 
Cyclopaedia,  in its article on Uqbar.  
    The big old house (we had taken it furnished) 
possessed a copy of that work. On the last pages 
of  Volume   XLVI    we   found   an   article    on 
Uppsala; on  the first  of  Volume XLVII,   "Ural-
Altaic Languages"—not a word on Uqbar.  Bioy, 

147
somewhat bewildered, consulted the volumes of 
the  Index.   He  tried   every  possible  spelling: 
Ukbar, Ucbar,  Ookbar, Oukbahr  ... all  in  vain. 
Before he left, he told me it was a region in Iraq 
or   Asia  Minor.    I   confess  I    nodded  a   bit 
uncomfortably;      I      surmised      that      that 
undocumented   country   and   its   anonymous 
heresiarch were a fiction that Bioy had invented 
on the spur  of the moment,  out  of modesty, in 
order  to   justify   a  fine-sounding   epigram.  A 
sterile  search  through  one   of  the  atlases  of 
Justus Perthes reinforced my doubt.  
    The next  day,  Bioy called  me from   Buenos 
Aires. He told  me he  had the  article on  Uqbar 
right  in front   of him—in  Volume  XLVI*  of the 
encyclopedia.  The  heresiarch's   name  wasn't 
given, but   the  entry  did   report  his  doctrine, 
formulated  in  words almost  identical  to  those 
Bioy had quoted, though from a literary  point of 
view perhaps inferior. Bioy  had remembered its 
being "copulation and mirrors  are abominable," 
while the text of the encyclopedia ran For one of 
those gnostics,   the  visible   universe  was   an 
illusion or,  more precisely,  a sophism. Mirrors 

148
and   fatherhood    are   hateful    because  they 
multiply   and  proclaim   it.    I  told  Bioy,  quite 
truthfully,  that  I'd like  to see that article.  A few 
days later he brought it to me—which surprised 
me,   because   the    scrupulous    cartographic 
indices of Hitter's Redounded evinced complete 
and total ignorance of the existence of the name 
Uqbar.  
    The volume Bioy brought was indeed Volume 
XLVI of  the Anglo-American  Cyclopaedia.   On 
both the false cover and spine, the alphabetical 
key to  the  volume's  contents  (Tor-Upps)  was 
the  same as  ours,  but  instead  of  917  pages, 
Bioy's volume  had  921. Those four  additional 
pages held the article  on Uqbar—an article not 
contemplated (as the reader will have noted) by 
the alphabetical key. We later compared the two 
volumes and  found  that  there  was no  further 
difference between  them. Both  (as  I  believe I 
have said) are  reprints  of  the tenth  edition  of 
the   Encyclopœdia   Britannica.         Bioy   had 
purchased his copy at one of his many sales.  
    We  read  the  article   with   some  care. The 
passage that Bioy had recalled was perhaps the 

149
only one  that  might  raise a  reader's eyebrow; 
the rest  seemed quite  plausible, very  much in 
keeping with the general tone of the work,  even 
(naturally)    somewhat  boring.    Rereading   it, 
however,  we   discovered   that    the   rigorous 
writing  was underlain  by a basic vagueness. Of 
the fourteen  names that  figured  in the  section 
on   geography,   we    recognized   only    three 
(Khorasan,   Armenia,    Erzerum),     and   they 
interpolated  into  the text  ambiguously.  Of the 
historical  names, we recognized  only  one: the 
impostor-wizard  Smerdis, and he was invoked, 
really,  as a  metaphor.  The  article  seemed  to 
define the  borders  of Uqbar,  but  its  nebulous 
points of reference were rivers  and craters and 
mountain  chains of the  region itself.  We read, 
for example, that the Axadelta and the lowlands 
of Tsai Khaldun  mark  the  southern boundary, 
and that wild horses breed on the islands of the 
delta.  
    That  was  at  the  top   of  page  918.  In  the 
section on Uqbar's history  (p. 920),  we learned 
that  religious   persecutions  in   the  thirteenth 
century had forced the  orthodox to  seek refuge 

150
on those same islands, where their obelisks are 
still   standing   and   their    stone  mirrors    are 
occasionally   unearthed.   The    section   titled 
"Language  and   Literature"    was   brief.   One 
memorable  feature:  the  article   said  that  the 
literature  of Uqbar  was a literature   of fantasy, 
and that its  epics and legends never referred to 
reality but rather to  the two imaginary realms of 
Mle'khnas and  Tlön....  The bibliography  listed 
four  volumes we  have yet to  find,  though  the 
third—Silas  Haslam's   History    of   the   Land 
Called   Uqbar    (1874)—does  figure    in    the 
catalogs   published    by    Bernard     Quaritch, 
Bookseller.1  
    [1Haslam was also the  author  of  A General 
History  of Labyrinths.] 
    The    first,      Lesbare    und     lesenswerthe 
Bemerkungen über das Land  Ukkbar  in Klein-
Asien,   published  in  1641, is the  work  of  one 
Johannes  Valentinus    Andrea.   That   fact   is 
significant: two or  three years afterward, I came 
upon that  name in the  unexpected pages of De 
Quincey  (   Writings,      Vol.   XIII*),     where  I 
learned that it belonged to a German theologian 

151
who in the  early seventeenth century described 
an  imaginary   community,   the   Rosy  Cross—
which other  men later founded,  in imitation   of 
his foredescription.  
    That  night,  Bioy  and  I   paid  a visit   to  the 
National   Library,   where   we   pored  in    vain 
through  atlases,  catalogs,  the   yearly  indices 
published    by    geographical    societies,    the 
memoirs  of  travelers  and   historians—no  one 
had ever  been in  Uqbar.  Nor  did  the  general 
index in Bioy's copy of the encyclopedia contain 
that name.  The next  day, Carlos Mastronardi* 
(whom  I  had  told  about  all  this)  spotted  the 
black-and-gold  spines of  the  Anglo-American 
Cyclopaedia  in  a  bookshop  at  the  corner  of 
Corrientesand Talcahuano....  He  went  in  and 
consulted Volume   XLVI.  Naturally,   he  found 
not the slightest mention of Uqbar.  
     
    II. 
    Some limited and waning memory of Herbert 
Ashe, an  engineer  for   the  Southern  Railway 
Line,  still    lingers  in   the   hotel   at  Adrogué, 
among the  effusive  honeysuckle vines  and  in 

152
the illusory  depths of the  mirrors.  In  life, Ashe 
was  afflicted    with    unreality,    as   so   many 
Englishmen  are; in  death,  he  is not  even  the 
ghost he was in life. He was tall and phlegmatic 
and his weary rectangular beard had once been 
red. I  understand  that he  was a widower,  and 
without issue. Every few years he would go back 
to England, to make his visit (I am judging  from 
some photographs he showed us)  to a  sundial 
and a stand of oak trees.  
    My  father   had  forged   one  of  those  close 
English friendships with  him (the  first adjective 
is perhaps  excessive) that  begin  by excluding 
confidences and  soon  eliminate  conversation. 
They would  exchange books  and newspapers; 
they  would   wage taciturn    battle  at   chess—I 
recall Ashe on the hotel veranda, holding a book 
of mathematics,  looking  up  sometimes  at  the 
irrecoverable colors of the sky. One evening, we 
spoke about the duodecimal number  system, in 
which twelve  is  written  10.  Ashe said  that  by 
coincidence he was just then transposing  some 
duodecimal  table or   other  to  sexagesimal (in 
which sixty  is written   10). He  added that  he'd 

153
been commissioned to  perform  that  task  by a 
Norwegian man  ... in  Rio Grande do Sul. Ashe 
and I had known each other for eight years, and 
he had  never mentioned  a  stay in  Brazil.  We 
spoke of the bucolic rural  life,  of capangas*  of 
the Brazilian  etymology  of the  word  "gaucho" 
(which   some   older    folk    in   Uruguay    still 
pronounce as gaucho),  and nothing  more  was 
said—God  forgive   me—of   duodecimals.    In 
September of  1937 (my  family  and I   were no 
longer  at  the  hotel),  Herbert  Ashe  died  of  a 
ruptured   aneurysm.  A   few   days  before  his 
death,  he   had   received   a  sealed,   certified 
package from Brazil  containing a  book printed 
in octavo major.  Ashe left  it in  the bar,  where, 
months later, I  found it. I  began to leaf through 
it    and   suddenly    I    experienced   a   slight, 
astonished sense of  dizziness that  I  shall  not 
describe, since   this  is   the  story   not   of  my 
emotions  but  of  Uqbar   and  Tlön  and   Orbis 
Tertius. (On one particular  Islamic night, which 
is called the Night  of Nights,  the secret portals 
of the heavens open wide and the  water in  the 
water jars  is  sweeter than  on  other  nights;  if 

154
those gates had opened as I sat there,  I would 
not have felt  what  I  was feeling that  evening.) 
The  book   was   written    in   English,   and   it 
consisted of 1001 pages. On the  leather-bound 
volume's  yellow   spine  I   read  these  curious 
words, which were repeated on the  false cover: 
A First Encyclopaedia of Tlön. Vol. XI.  Hlaer  to 
Jangr.      There   was   no   date   or   place   of 
publication.  On the first  page and again on the 
onionskin  page that  covered  one of  the  color 
illustrations  there was stamped a blue oval with 
this  inscription:    Orbis   Tertius.      Two  years 
earlier, I  had discovered in one  of the volumes 
of   a   certain   pirated    encyclopedia   a   brief 
description of  a false country; now fate  had set 
before me something much  more precious and 
painstaking. I now  held in my hands a vast and 
systematic fragment of  the entire  history  of an 
unknown planet,  with  its  architectures and  its 
playing cards, the horror  of its mythologies and 
the murmur  of its tongues, its emperors and its 
seas, its minerals  and  its birds  and  fishes, its 
algebra   and   its    fire,    its    theological    and 
metaphysical        controversies—all       joined, 

155
articulated,   coherent,   and    with   no    visible 
doctrinal purpose or hint  of parody.  
    In  the  "Volume  Eleven"  of  which   I  speak, 
there are allusions to later  and earlier volumes. 
Néstor Ibarra,   in  a  now-classic  article  in  the 
N.R.F.,   denied that  such companion  volumes 
exist; Ezequiel Martinez  Estrada* and Drieu La 
Rochelle  have  rebutted   that  doubt,   perhaps 
victoriously.   The  fact   is,   the   most   diligent 
searches have so far proven futile. In vain  have 
we ransacked the libraries  of the two  Americas 
and  Europe.  Alfonso   Reyes, weary  of   those 
"subordinate drudgeries  of a detective nature," 
has proposed that between us, we undertake to 
reconstruct  the many massive volumes that are 
missing:  ex  ungue  leonem.   He   figures,  half 
seriously,  half   in  jest,   that   a  generation  of 
Tlönists would suffice. That bold  estimate takes 
us back to the initial  problem: Who, singular  or 
plural, invented  Tlön? The plural  is, I  suppose, 
inevitable,  since   the  hypothesis   of  a   single 
inventor—some  infinite    Leibniz    working   in 
obscurity   and   self-effacement   —  has   been 
unanimously  discarded. It   is  conjectured  that 

156
this "brave  new world"  is  the work  of a  secret 
society of   astronomers,  biologists,  engineers, 
meta-physicians,  poets,  chemists,  algebraists, 
moralists,   painters,   geometers,   guided   and 
directed by some shadowy man of genius.  
    There are many  men adept in  those diverse 
disciplines,  but  few  capable  of  imagination—
fewer still capable of subordinating imagination 
to a rigorous and systematic plan. The plan is so 
vast  that  the   contribution   of   each writer    is 
infinitesimal.  
    At first  it  was thought  that  Tlön was a mere 
chaos,  an   irresponsible   act   of   imaginative 
license; today we know that  it is a cosmos, and 
that  the  innermost   laws  that  govern  it   have 
been formulated, however provisionally  so. Let 
it suffice to remind  the reader that the apparent 
contradictions    of   Volume    Eleven   are   the 
foundation  stone  of  the  proof  that   the  other 
volumes do in fact exist: the order that has been 
observed in it is just  that lucid,  just that fitting. 
Popular   magazines   have    trumpeted,    with 
pardonable excess, the zoology and topography 
of Tlön. In  my  view, its  transparent  tigers and 

157
towers  of   blood  do   not   perhaps  merit   the 
constant attention  of  all  mankind, but  I  might 
be so bold as to beg a few  moments to  outline 
its conception of the universe.  
    Hume   declared   for   all    time   that   while 
Berkeley's arguments  admit   not  the  slightest 
refutation,    they    inspire    not    the   slightest 
conviction. That pronouncement is entirely  true 
with  respect  to  the  earth,  entirely   false with 
respect to Tlön. The nations  of that  planet  are, 
congenitally,   idealistic.   Their    language  and 
those  things   derived   from   their   language—
religion,   literature,    metaphysics—presuppose 
idealism. For  the  people of  Tlön,  the world  is 
not  an  amalgam  of  objects  in  space; it   is  a 
heterogeneous series of independent acts —the 
world  is successive, temporal,  but  not  spatial. 
There   are    no   nouns    in    the    conjectural 
Ursprache  of  Tlön,  from   which  its   "present-
day" languages and  dialects  derive:  there  are 
impersonal  verbs,   modified   by  monosyllabic 
suffixes  (or  prefixes)  functioning   as  adverbs. 
For example, there is no noun that corresponds 
to our word "moon," but  there is a verb which in 

158
English would be "to moonate"  or "to enmoon." 
"The moon rose above the river" is  "hlör  ufang 
axaxaxasmio,"     or,  as  Xul   Solar*  succinctly 
translates: Upward,  behind  the onstreaming  it 
mooned,  
    That principle  applies to the languages of the 
southern     hemisphere.    In      the     northern 
hemisphere (about   whose Ursprache   Volume 
Eleven  contains  very  little    information),   the 
primary    unit     is   not     the   verb    but    the 
monosyllabic  adjective. Nouns  are  formed  by 
stringing together  adjectives. One does not say 
"moon";   one  says "aerial-bright   above  dark-
round" or "soft-amberish-celestial"  or any other 
string.  In  this  case, the complex  of  adjectives 
corresponds to a real  object, but that  is purely 
fortuitous.    The   literature    of   the    northern 
hemisphere (as in Meinong's  subsisting world) 
is  filled   with  ideal   objects,  called  forth   and 
dissolved in an  instant, as the  poetry requires. 
Sometimes  mere  simultaneity    creates  them. 
There are things  composed of  two  terms,  one 
visual and  the other  auditory:  the  color of  the 
rising sun and  the distant  caw of a bird.  There 

159
are things   composed  of  many:  the   sun  and 
water against the  swimmer's breast, the  vague 
shimmering pink  one sees when one's eyes are 
closed, the sensation of being swept along by a 
river  and also  by  Morpheus.  These objects of 
the  second  degree   may  be   combined   with 
others; the process, using certain abbreviations, 
is virtually   infinite.   There  are  famous  poems 
composed of a single enormous word; this word 
is a "poetic object" created by the poet. The fact 
that no one believes in the  reality expressed by 
these nouns means, paradoxically, that there is 
no  limit   to  their   number.   The  languages of 
Tlön's  northern    hemisphere  possess all   the 
nouns  of  the   Indo-European   languages—and 
many, many more.  
    It  is no exaggeration to say that the classical 
culture    outlines     composed    of     a    single 
discipline—psychology—to which all others  are 
subordinate. I  have said that the people of that 
planet  conceive  the  universe   as  a  series  of 
mental  processes that occur  not  in  space but 
rather successively, in time. Spinoza endows his 
inexhaustible deity with  the attributes of spatial 

160
extension and of thought; no one in  Tlön would 
understand the juxtaposition  of the  first, which 
is   typical   only   of   certain    states,  and   the 
second— which is  a  perfect  synonym  for  the 
cosmos. Or to put  it another  way:  space is not 
conceived as   having  duration    in   time.   The 
perception of  a cloud of  smoke on the horizon 
and then  the countryside  on fire  and  then the 
half-extinguished  cigarette  that   produced  the 
scorched earth is considered an example of the 
association of ideas.  
    This  thoroughgoing   monism,   or   idealism, 
renders  science   null.   To   explain    (or   pass 
judgment on)  an event is  to link  it  to another; 
on  Tlön,  that   joining-together   is  a  posterior 
state of the subject,  and  can neither affect nor 
illuminate  the prior  state. Every mental state is 
irreducible: the  simple act of giving  it a name—
i.e., of classifying  it—introduces a distortion,   a 
"slant"   or   "bias."   One   might   well   deduce, 
therefore, that on Tlön there are no sciences—or 
even any "systems of thought." The paradoxical 
truth is  that systems of thought do exist, almost 
countless numbers  of  them.  Philosophies  are 

161
much    like    the    nouns    of     the    northern 
hemisphere; the fact that every philosophy is by 
definition  a dialectical  game, a Philosophie des 
Als Ob, has allowed them  to proliferate.   There 
are systems upon  systems that   are incredible 
but  possessed of a  pleasing architecture  or   a 
certain      agreeable      sensationalism.      The 
metaphysicians of Tlön  seek not truth,  or even 
plausibility—they  seek  to  amaze, astound.  In 
their   view,  metaphysics  is   a  branch  of   the 
literature of fantasy. They know that a system is 
naught but  the subordination  of all  the aspects 
of the  universe to  one  of those  aspects— any 
one of them.  Even the phrase "all  the aspects" 
should  be   avoided,   because it    implies   the 
impossible addition  of  the present  instant  and 
all those  instants that  went  before. Nor  is  the 
plural    "those    instants    that    went    before" 
legitimate,  for   it   implies  another   impossible 
operation.... One  of  the schools  of philosophy 
on Tlön goes so far as to  deny the existence of 
time; it argues that the present is undefined and 
indefinite,  the  future  has  no reality   except as 
present hope, and the past has no reality except 

162
as   present   recollection.2    [2   Russell    (The 
Analysis of  Mind [1921], p. 159) posits that  the 
world  was  created  only  moments   ago, filled 
with human beings who "remember"  an illusory 
past.] 
    Another   school   posits  that   all   time    has 
already  passed, so   that  our   life   is  but   the 
crepuscular memory, or  crepuscular reflection, 
doubtlessly  distorted    and   mutilated,   of    an 
irrecoverable process. Yet  another  claims that 
the history  of the universe—and in  it, our  lives 
and  every faintest   detail  of  our   lives—is the 
handwriting   of   a  subordinate  god   trying   to 
communicate with  a demon.  Another,  that the 
universe    might     be    compared    to     those 
cryptograms in which not all  the symbols count, 
and only   what  happens  every three  hundred 
nights is  actually  real. Another,  that  while  we 
sleep here, we  are awake  somewhere else, so 
that every man is in fact two men.  
    Of all the doctrines  of Tlön, none has caused 
more uproar  than  materialism.  Some thinkers 
have formulated this philosophy (generally with 
less clarity than zeal) as though  putting  forth a 

163
paradox. In   order  to  make this  inconceivable 
thesis  more  easily  understood,   an  eleventh-
century heresiarch3 [3 A  "century,"  in  keeping 
with the duodecimal system in use on Tlön,  is a 
period of  144 years.] conceived the sophism of 
the    nine    copper     coins,    a    paradox    as 
scandalously famous  on   Tlön  as  the   Eleatic 
aporiae to  ourselves. There are  many versions 
of   that   "specious   argument,"   with    varying 
numbers of coins and discoveries; the following 
is the most common: 
    On Tuesday, X  is walking  along  a deserted 
road    and    loses   nine    copper    coins.   On 
Thursday, Y  finds four  coins in  the road, their 
luster   somewhat   dimmed    by   Wednesday's 
rain. On  Friday,  Z discovers three coins  in the 
road. Friday  morning  X finds  two coins on  the 
veranda of his house.  
    From  this   story  the   heresiarch  wished  to 
deduce the reality—i.e., the continuity in  time—
of those nine recovered coins. "It is absurd,"  he 
said, "to imagine  that four  of the  coins did not 
exist  from  Tuesday  to  Thursday,  three   from 
Tuesday to Friday afternoon, two from  Tuesday 

164
to  Friday  morning.  It   is  logical to   think  that 
they in fact did  exist—albeit in some secret way 
that we  are forbidden  to  understand—at every 
moment of those three periods of time."  
    The  language of  Tlön   resisted formulating 
this paradox;  most  people did  not  understand 
it.  The "common  sense" school at  first  simply 
denied the anecdote's veracity. They claimed  it 
was  a  verbal  fallacy   based  on  the   reckless 
employment     of    two     neologisms,     words 
unauthorized by standard  usage and foreign to 
all rigorous  thought:  the  two  verbs "find"   and 
"lose,"   which,    since   they    presuppose  the 
identity  of   the  nine  first   coins and  the   nine 
latter  ones,  entail  a  petitio   principii.     These 
critics  reminded  their  listeners  that  all  nouns 
(man, coin,  Thursday,  Wednesday, rain)  have 
only  metaphoric   value.  They  denounced  the 
misleading detail that  "[the  coins']  luster [was] 
somewhat dimmed   by  Wednesday's  rain"   as 
presupposing what  it  attempted  to  prove:  the 
continuing   existence of   the  four   coins  from 
Tuesday  to   Thursday.   They  explained   that 
"equality"  is one  thing  and "identity"   another, 

165
and  they  formulated    a  sort  of   reductio   ad 
absurdum —the hypothetical  case of nine men 
who  on  nine   successive nights  experience  a 
sharp pain.  
    Would   it   not   be  absurd,   they  asked,  to 
pretend that  the men had suffered one and the 
same pain?4 
    They   claimed    that    the   heresiarch    was 
motivated   by    the   blasphemous    desire   to 
attribute the divine  category Being to a handful 
of mere  coins, and  that  he  sometimes denied 
plurality  and sometimes did not.  
    They  argued:  If   equality  entailed  identity, 
one would  have  to admit   that  the  nine  coins 
were a single coin.  
    Incredibly,  those refutations  did  not  put  an 
end to  the  matter.  A  hundred  years after  the 
problem had first  been posed, a thinker no less 
brilliant    than    the   heresiarch,    but   of    the 
orthodox  tradition,   formulated  a  most  daring 
hypothesis. His happy conjecture was that there 
is but a single subject; that indivisible  subject is 
every being in  the universe,  and the  beings of 
the universe  are the  organs and  masks of  the 

166
deity. X is  Y and is  above Z. Z discovers three 
coins, then, because he remembers that  X  lost 
them; X  finds  two coins  on the  veranda of his 
house because he remembers  that  the  others 
have been  found....   Volume  Eleven   suggests 
that  this  idealistic  pantheism  triumphed   over 
all other  schools of  thought  for  three  primary 
reasons: first,  because it repudiated  solipsism; 
second, because it left intact  the  psychological 
foundation of the sciences; and third, because it 
preserved     the      possibility      of      religion. 
Schopenhauer      (passionate        yet       lucid 
Schopenhauer)   formulates    a    very    similar 
doctrine in the  first volume  of his Parerga  und 
Paralipomena.  
    Tlön's  geometry  is made  up  of  two  rather 
distinct disciplines—visual geometry and tactile 
geometry.  
    Tactile  geometry  corresponds  to  our   own, 
and   is   subordinate    to   the    visual.   Visual 
geometry is based on the surface, not the point; 
it  has no  parallel  lines,  and  it  claims  that  as 
one's body moves through space, it modifies the 
shapes that  surround   it.  The  basis  of  Tlön's 

167
arithmetic  is the notion  of  indefinite  numbers; 
it   stresses the   importance   of   the   concepts 
"greater than"  and "less than,"  which  our  own 
mathematicians  represent with  the  symbols  > 
and <. The people outliner taught that the act of 
counting modifies the amount  counted, turning 
indefinites  into  définîtes. The  fact that  several 
persons counting the same quantity come to the 
same result is for  the  psychologists of Tlön  an 
example  of   the   association  of   ideas  or   of 
memorization.   —We must   always  remember 
that on  Tlön,  the  subject of  knowledge is  one 
and eternal.  
    Within  the sphere of literature,   too, the idea 
of the  single subject is  all-powerful.  Books are 
rarely    signed,   nor    does   the    concept    of 
plagiarism exist: 
    ''Today,  one  of   Tlön's  religions   contends, 
platonically,   that   a   certain   pain,   a  certain 
greenish-yellow  color,  a  certain   temperature, 
and a  certain  sound  are  all  the  same, single 
reality.  All   men,   in   the  dizzying   instant   of 
copulation,  are  the  same man.  All   men  who 
speak  a   line    of   Shakespeare  are   William 

168
Shakespeare.  
    It  has  been decided  that  all  books are  the 
work  of  a single  author   who  is  timeless and 
anonymous.  Literary   criticism    often   invents 
authors: It  will  take  two dissimilar   works—the 
Tao   Te  Ching    and   the   1001Nights,      for 
instance—attribute them to a single author, and 
then  in   all   good   conscience determine   the 
psychology of that  most interesting  homme  de 
lettres.  
    Their books are also different  from  our own. 
Their fiction   has but  a single  plot,  with  every 
imaginable   permutation.    Their   works   of   a 
philosophical  nature   invariably   contain   both 
the thesis and  the antithesis,  the  rigorous pro 
and contra of every argument. A book that does 
not   contain   its   counter-book   is   considered 
incomplete.  
    Century   upon   century   of   idealism   could 
hardly  have failed  to  influence  reality.  In   the 
most  ancient  regions   of  Tlön  one  may,   not 
infrequently,   observe the   duplication   of  lost 
objects: Two  persons are looking  for  a pencil; 
the first  person  finds  it,  but says nothing;  the 

169
second finds a second pencil,  no less real,  but 
more in  keeping  with  his  expectations.  These 
secondary objects are called hrönir,     and they 
are, though awkwardly so, slightly  longer. Until 
recently, hrönir  were the coincidental  offspring 
of distraction   and  forgetfulness.  It  is  hard  to 
believe  that   they   have   been  systematically 
produced for  only  about a  hundred  years, but 
that is  what  Volume  Eleven tells  us. The first 
attempts  were   unsuccessful, but   the   modus 
operandi is worth  recalling:  The warden of one 
of the state prisons informed  his prisoners that 
there were certain tombs in the ancient bed of a 
nearby river, and he promised that  anyone who 
brought in  an important  find  would be set free. 
For months  before the excavation, the  inmates 
were shown   photographs  of  what   they  were 
going to discover. That first attempt proved that 
hope and greed can be inhibiting; after a week's 
work  with    pick  and   shovel,  the   only   hrön 
unearthed was a rusty  wheel, dated some time 
later   than  the   date  of  the  experiment.   The 
experiment was  kept secret,  but  was repeated 
afterward at four high schools. In three of them, 

170
the failure was virtually  complete; in  the fourth 
(where the principal happened to die during  the 
early excavations), the  students unearthed—or 
produced—a gold mask, an archaic sword,  two 
or three clay amphorae, and the verdigris'd  and 
mutilated torso  of a king with  an inscription  on 
the chest that has yet to be deciphered. Thus it 
was discovered  that   no  witnesses  who  were 
aware of the experimental  nature of the  search 
could be allowed near the site....  
    Group research projects  produce conflicting 
finds;   now   individual,   virtually    spur-of-the-
moment projects are preferred.  The systematic 
production of  hrönir  (says Volume Eleven) has 
been of invaluable aid to archaeologists, making 
it  possible not  only to  interrogate  but  even to 
modify the past, which is now no less plastic, no 
less malleable than the future.  A  curious bit  of 
information:   hrönir   of  the   second and  third 
remove— hrönir   derived  from   another  hrön, 
and hrönir   derived from  the  hrön  of a  hrön—
exaggerate the aberrations of the first;  those of 
the fifth  remove  are almost identical;   those of 
the ninth   can  be confused  with   those of  the 

171
second;  and  those   of   the   eleventh  remove 
exhibit a purity  of line that even the originals do 
not exhibit.  The process is periodic: The hrönir 
of the twelfth remove begin to degenerate.  
    Sometimes stranger and purer than any hrön 
is the  ur  —the thing   produced by  suggestion, 
the   object    brought    forth     by    hope.   The 
magnificent   gold    mask   I   mentioned    is   a 
distinguished example.  
    Things  duplicate  themselves on  Tlön;  they 
also tend  to  grow  vague or  "sketchy,"  and  to 
lose detail when they begin to be forgotten. The 
classic example is the  doorway that  continued 
to exist so  long as a certain  beggar frequented 
it,  but  which  was lost  to  sight  when he  died. 
Sometimes a few birds, a horse, have saved the 
ruins of an amphitheater.  
    Salto Oriental, 1940 
     
    POSTSCRIPT----1947 
    I  reproduce  the  article  above  exactly  as it 
appeared   in    the   Anthology     of    Fantastic 
Literature    (1940),   the   only   changes  being 
editorial cuts of one or  another metaphor and a 

172
tongue-in-cheek  sort  of  summary  that   would 
now  be considered  flippant.   So  many  things 
have happened since 1940—Allow me to recall 
some of them:  
    In  March of  1941, a handwritten  letter from 
Gunnar  Erfjord  was  discovered in   a book  by 
Hinton  that had belonged to Herbert  Ashe. The 
envelope  was  postmarked   Ouro   Preto;   the 
mystery  of  Tlön  was  fully   elucidated  by  the 
letter.     It     confirmed     Martinez      Estrada's 
hypothesis:   The  splendid    story   had  begun 
sometime in the early seventeenth century, one 
night    in    Lucerne    or    London.    A    secret 
benevolent society (which numbered among  its 
members Dalgarno and, later, George Berkeley) 
was born; its mission: to invent a country.  In its 
vague initial  program,  there  figured  "hermetic 
studies," philanthropy,  and the  Kabbalah. (The 
curious book by  Valentinus Andrea  dates from 
that   early   period.)    After   several   years   of 
confabulations   and   premature    collaborative 
drafts, the members of the  society realized that 
one generation  would  not  suffice  for  creating 
and giving  full   expression to  a  country.  They 

173
decided that each of the masters that  belonged 
to the society would select a disciple to carry on 
the  work.   That  hereditary   arrangement   was 
followed; after an interim  of two hundred  years, 
the persecuted fraternity turned  up again in the 
New World.  In  1824,  in  Memphis, Tennessee, 
one of the members had a conversation with the 
reclusive  millionaire    Ezra  Buckley.   Buckley, 
somewhat contemptuously,  let  the  man talk—
and then laughed at the modesty of the project. 
He  told    the  man   that   in    America  it    was 
nonsense to invent a country—what they ought 
to do  was invent a  planet.  To that  giant  of an 
idea he  added  another,  the  brainchild   of  his 
nihilism 
    Buckley was  a freethinker,   a fatalist,  and  a 
defender of  slavery:  The enormous  enterprise 
must  be kept  secret. At  that  time   the twenty 
volumes of the  Encyclopœdia Britannica   were 
all  the  rage;  Buckley  suggested a  systematic 
encyclopedia of  the illusory   planet.  He  would 
bequeath to  them  his  gold-veined  mountains, 
his  navigable  rivers,   his  prairies   thundering 
with   bulls    and   buffalo,    his    Negroes,  his 

174
brothels,  and  his  dollars,  he  said, under  one 
condition:  "The  work shall  make no  pact with 
the  impostor   Jesus Christ."   Buckley  did  not 
believe in  God, yet he  wanted to  prove  to the 
nonexistent  God  that  mortals   could  conceive 
and shape  a world.   Buckley  was poisoned  in 
Baton Rouge in  1828; in  1914 the society sent 
its members  (now  numbering  three  hundred) 
the final  volume  of  the First   Encydopœdia of 
Tlön.     It   was  published   secretly:   the  forty 
volumes that  made up  the work  (the  grandest 
work of letters  ever undertaken by humankind) 
were to   be  the  basis  for  another,   yet  more 
painstaking work, to  be written this  time not  in 
English  but  in  one  of  the  languages of  Tlön. 
That survey of an illusory  world was tentatively 
titled  Orbis   Tertius,    and  one  of  its  modest 
demiurges was Herbert Ashe—whether as agent 
or colleague  of Gunnar  Erfjord,   I  cannot  say. 
His receipt of a copy of Volume Eleven seems to 
favor the second possibility. But what about the 
others? 
     In  1942,  the  plot  thickened.   I  recall  with 
singular  clarity   one  of   the  first   events  that 

175
occurred,  something   of   whose   premonitory 
nature  I  believe  I  sensed even  then.  It   took 
place in  an  apartment  on  Laprida,  across the 
street from a high, bright  balcony that faced the 
setting  sun.   Princess  Faucigny  Lucinge  had 
received from  Poitiers   a crate  containing  her 
silver table service. From  the vast innards  of a 
packing  case  emblazoned  with   international 
customs stamps she removed, one  by one, the 
fine unmoving  things:  plate  from  Utrecht  and 
Paris  chased   with   hard    heraldic   fauna,   a 
samovar. Among  the  pieces,  trembling   softly 
but  perceptibly,   like   a   sleeping  bird,   there 
throbbed,    mysteriously,     a    compass.   The 
princess did  not   recognize it.  Its  blue  needle 
yearned  toward    magnetic   north;   its    metal 
casing  was  concave;  the  letters   on   its  dial 
belonged to one of  the alphabets of  Tlön. That 
was the first  intrusion  of the  fantastic world  of 
Tlön into the real world.  
    An unsettling coincidence made me a witness 
to the second intrusion  as well. This event took 
place some months later, in  a sort of a country 
general-store-and-bar  owned   by   a  Brazilian 

176
man in the Cuchilla Negra. Amorim*  and I were 
returning  from  Sant'Anna. There was a freshet 
on  the Tacuarembó;  as  there  was no  way  to 
cross, we were forced to  try  (to  try  to endure, 
that is) the rudimentary  hospitality  at hand.  
    The storekeeper  set up  some creaking  cots 
for us in  a large storeroom clumsy with  barrels 
and stacks of leather. We lay down, but we were 
kept    awake   until     almost    dawn    by    the 
drunkenness of an unseen neighbor, who swung 
between indecipherable  streams of  abuse and 
loudly sung snatches of milongas—or  snatches 
of  the  same  milonga,     actually.  As  one  can 
imagine,  we   attributed    the   man's   insistent 
carrying-on  to the  storekeeper's fiery  rotgut.... 
By shortly after daybreak, the  man was dead in 
the hallway.  The  hoarseness of  his  voice had 
misled   us—he  was   a  young   man.    In   his 
delirium,   several coins  had  slipped  from   his 
wide gaucho belt, as had a gleaming metal cone 
about a  die's  width   in  diameter.  A  little   boy 
tried to  pick the  cone-shaped object up, but  in 
vain; a full-grown man could  hardly do it. I  held 
it for  a few minutes  in the  palm of  my hand;  I 

177
recall that  its weight  was unbearable, and  that 
even  after   someone  took   it   from    me,  the 
sensation of terrible  heaviness endured.  I also 
recall the  neat  circle  it  engraved in  my  flesh. 
That  evidence of  a  very  small   yet  extremely 
heavy object left an unpleasant aftertaste of fear 
and  revulsion.  A  paisano   suggested that   we 
throw it in  the swollen river. Amorim  purchased 
it for  a few pesos. No one knew anything about 
the dead man,  except that  "he  came from  the 
border."  Those  small,  incredibly  heavy  cones 
(made of a metal not of this world) are an image 
of the deity in certain Tlönian religions.  
    Here   I   end  the   personal  portion    of  my 
narration.   The   rest   lies    in   every   reader's 
memory (if not his hope or fear). Let it  suffice to 
recall, or mention,  the  subsequent events, with 
a simple  brevity   of  words  which  the  general 
public's concave memory will enrich or expand: 
    In  1944, an investigator from   The Nashville 
American  unearthed  the forty  volumes of  The 
First   Encyclopaedia  of   Tlön   in  a   Memphis 
library. To  this day there is some disagreement 
as to whether  that discovery was accidental  or 

178
consented to and guided by the directors of  the 
still-nebulous    Orbis     Tertius;     the    second 
supposition  is entirely   plausible.  Some of  the 
unbelievable  features  of  Volume  Eleven  (the 
multiplication   of  hrönir,      for   example)  have 
been eliminated or muted in the Memphis  copy. 
It  seems reasonable to  suppose that   the cuts 
obey the intent  to  set forth  a world  that is not 
too  incompatible    with   the   real  world.    The 
spread  of   Tlönian    objects  through    various 
countries would complement that plan. 
    There is  still,  of  course, the problem  of  the 
material  from which some objects are made.  
    At  any rate,  the international   press made a 
great hue and cry about this "find."  Handbooks, 
anthologies,   surveys,    "literal     translations," 
authorized  and  pirated  reprints  of  Mankind's 
Greatest Masterpiece filled  the world,  and  still 
do. Almost   immediately,  reality  "caved  in"  at 
more than one point.  The truth  is, it  wanted to 
cave in.   Ten  years  ago,  any  symmetry,  any 
system with an appearance of order—dialectical 
materialism,     anti-Semitism,     Nazism—could 
spellbind  and hypnotize  mankind.   How  could 

179
the world  not fall  under the  sway of Tlön,  how 
could  it   not  yield  to   the  vast  and  minutely 
detailed  evidence  of   an   ordered  planet?   It 
would  be  futile   to  reply   that   reality  is   also 
orderly. Perhaps it is, but orderly  in accordance 
with divine laws (read: "inhuman  laws") that we 
can never quite manage to penetrate. Tlön may 
well be a labyrinth,  but  it  is a labyrinth   forged 
by men, a labyrinth   destined to  be deciphered 
by men.  
    Contact  with  Tlön,   the  habit  of  Tlön,   has 
disintegrated this  world.  Spellbound  by  Tlön's 
rigor, humanity  has forgotten, and  continues to 
forget, that it  is the  rigor of  chess masters, not 
of     angels.    Already     Tlön's     (conjectural) 
"primitive    language"   has   filtered    into   our 
schools;   already    the    teaching    of     Tlön's 
harmonious    history     (filled      with     moving 
episodes)  has   obliterated    the   history    that 
governed my own childhood; already a fictitious 
past has  supplanted  in  men's  memories  that 
other  past,  of  which   we  now  know   nothing 
certain —not even that it is  false. Numismatics, 
pharmacology,   and   archaeology  have   been 

180
reformed.  I   understand  that   biology   and 
mathematics are   also  awaiting  their   next 
avatar... A scattered dynasty of  recluses has 
changed the face of the earth—and their work 
continues. If  my   projections are  correct,  a 
hundred years from now someone will discover 
the    hundred   volumes    of    The    Second 
Encyclopoedia of Tlön.  
   At   that,   French  and  English  and  mere 
Spanish will  disappear from  the  earth. The 
world  will  be  Tlön.  That  makes very  little 
difference to me; through my quiet days in this 
hotel in  Adrogué, I go on  revising (though I 
never   intend   to    publish)    an   indecisive 
translation in   the  style  of  Quevedo of  Sir 
Thomas Browne's Urne Buriall.  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

181
   The  Approach  to Al-Mu'tasim  
    
   Philip  Guedalla writes  that the  novel The 
Approach to  Al-Mu'tasim,    by  the  Bombay 
attorney  Mir    Bahadur   Ali,   is   "a    rather 
uncomfortable amalgam of one of those Islamic 
allegorical poems that seldom fail to  interest 
their  translator  and  one of   those detective 
novels that inevitably surpass John H. Watson's 
and perfect  the  horror  of  life  in   the  most 
irreproachable rooming-houses of Brighton." 
Earlier,  Mr.  Cecil  Roberts had  detected in 
Bahadur's book "the  dual,  and  implausible, 
influence of Wilkie Collins and the illustrious 
twelfth-century  Persian  poet   Farïd   al-dïn 
Attar"; the none-too-original Guedalla repeats 
this  calm   observation, though   in   choleric 
accents. In essence, the two critics concur: both 
point out the detective mechanism of the novel 
and both speak of its mystical undercurrents. 
That hybridity may inspire us to imagine some 
similarity to Chesterton; we shall soon discover 
that no such similarity exists.  
   The  first  edition  of  The Approach to  Al-

182
Mu'tasim appeared in  Bombay in late  1932. Its 
paper   was   virtually     newsprint;     its    cover 
announced to the buyer that  this  was "the first 
detective novel written   by a native  of Bombay 
City." Within   months,  readers had  bought out 
four printings  of a thousand copies each.  
    The   Bombay    Quarterly     Review,        the 
Bombay  Gazette,   the  Calcutta  Review,    the 
Hindustan    Review   of   Allahabad,    and   the 
Calcutta Englishman   rained  dithyrambs  upon 
it.  It    was  then  that   Bahadur   published   an 
illustrated  edition   he titled   The  Conversation 
with  the  Man   Called  Al-Mu'tasim   and  coyly 
subtitled A  Game with  Shifting  Mirrors.    That 
edition  has just  been  reprinted  in  London  by 
Victor Gollancz with  a  foreword by  Dorothy  L. 
Sayers,  but    with     the    (perhaps   merciful) 
omission of  the illustrations.   I  have that  book 
before me; I  have not been able to  come upon 
the first,  which  I  suspect is greatly  superior. I 
am supported in this conclusion by an appendix 
that details the fundamental  difference between 
the original,   1932, version  and  the  edition  of 
1934.   Before    examining    the     work    (and 

183
discussing it), I think  it  would be a good idea to 
give a brief general outline of the novel.  
    Its  visible  protagonist,  whose name  we are 
never told,  is a law  student in  Bombay. In  the 
most blasphemous  way he  has renounced the 
Islamic  faith  of  his  parents,  but  as the  tenth 
night of the moon  of Muharram  wanes he finds 
himself  at the  center  of a  riot,  a  street  battle 
between Muslims and  Hindus.  It  is  a night  of 
tambours and invocations; through  the inimical 
multitude,   the  great  paper  baldachins  of  the 
Muslim  procession  make their   way. A  Hindu 
brick  flies   from   a  rooftop   nearby;  someone 
buries a dagger in a belly; someone—a Muslim? 
a  Hindu?—dies  and   is   trampled   underfoot. 
Three thousand   men  do  battle—cane against 
revolver,  obscenity  against  imprecation,   God 
the indivisible   against  the  gods.  In  a  sort  of 
daze, the free-thinking   law  student  enters the 
fray. With  desperate hands, he  kills  (or thinks 
he  has  killed)   a  Hindu.   Thundering,   horse-
borne, half  asleep, the  Sirkar  police intervene 
with  impartial   lashes of  their  crops.  Virtually 
under  the  hooves of   the  horses, the  student 

184
makes his escape, fleeing toward the outermost 
suburbs  of  the  city.  He  crosses two  railroad 
tracks,  or  twice   crosses the  same  track.  He 
scales the wall of an unkempt garden, which has 
a circular  tower  toward  the rear.  A  "lean and 
evil  mob  of moon-coloured   hounds"  emerges 
from the  black rosebushes. Fearing for his  life, 
the law  student  seeks refuge in the  tower.  He 
climbs    an    iron    ladder—some   rungs    are 
missing—and on   the  flat   roof,   which  has  a 
pitch-black hole in  the center, he comes upon a 
filthy  man squatting  in the  moonlight,  pouring 
forth  a  vigorous   stream  of  urine.   This  man 
confides  to   the   law  student   that   it    is  his 
profession  to  steal   the  gold  teeth   from   the 
cadavers the Farsees bring, swaddled in white, 
to   that    tower.   He   makes   several   further 
gruesome remarks and then he mentions that it 
has  been  fourteen   nights   since  he  purified 
himself with  ox  dung. He  speaks with obvious 
anger  about  certain   Gujarati    horse  thieves, 
"eaters of dog meat and lizard  meat—men, in a 
word, as vile as you and I."  The sky is  growing 
light; there is  a lowering circle of fat vultures  in 

185
the air. The law student, exhausted, falls asleep; 
when he awakens, the sun  now high,  the thief 
has disappeared.  A  couple of  cigarettes  from 
Trichinopolis  have also disappeared, as have a 
few silver rupees. In the face of the menace that 
looms from the  previous night,  the law student 
decides to lose himself in India. He reflects that 
he  has  shown  himself  capable  of   killing   an 
idolater,  yet  incapable   of  knowing   with   any 
certainty whether the Muslim  possesses more of 
truth  than the idolater  does. The name Gujarat 
has remained with him,  as has that of a malka-
sansi  (a  woman  of   the  caste  of  thieves)  in 
Palanpur, a woman favored by the imprecations 
and  hatred   of   the   corpse-robber.   The   law 
student reasons that the wrath  and hatred  of a 
man so thoroughly  despicable is the equivalent 
of  a  hymn  of  praise.  He  resolves,  therefore, 
though with  little  hope, to find  this woman. He 
performs his prayers, and then he sets out, with 
sure, slow steps, on the  long path.  That brings 
the reader to  the end of  the second chapter of 
the book.  
    It    would    be    impossible    to    trace   the 

186
adventures of the remaining nineteen  chapters. 
There  is  a  dizzying   pullulation   of   dramatis 
personae —not  to  mention   a  biography  that 
seems to  catalog every  motion  of  the  human 
spirit      (from      iniquity      to      mathematical 
speculation) and  a  pilgrimage  that  covers the 
vast geography of Hindustan.  The  story begun 
in   Bombay   continues   in    the   lowlands    of 
Palanpur, pauses for  a night  and  a day at  the 
stone gate of  Bikanir,  narrates  the  death of  a 
blind   astrologer   in   a  cesspool  in    Benares, 
conspires in the multiform  palace at Katmandu, 
prays and fornicates in the pestilential stench of 
the Machua bazaar in Calcutta, watches the day 
being born out of the sea from a scribe's stool in 
Madras, watches  the evening  decline  into  the 
sea from  a balcony  in  the state  of  Travancor, 
gutters  and  dies in   Hindapur,   and  closes its 
circle of leagues and years in  Bombay again, a 
few  steps from   the  garden  of  those  "moon-
coloured" hounds. The plot itself  is this: A  man 
(the unbelieving,  fleeing  law  student  we  have 
met)  falls  among  people of  the  lowest,  vilest 
sort and  accommodates himself  to  them,  in  a 

187
kind of  contest of  iniquity.  Suddenly—with the 
miraculous shock of  Crusoe when he  sees that 
human footprint   in  the  sand—the law student 
perceives some mitigation of the evil: a moment 
of tenderness, of exaltation, of silence, in one of 
the abominable men. "It  was as though a more 
complex interlocutor   had  spoken."  He  knows 
that the  wretch with  whom  he is conversing is 
incapable of that momentary  decency; thus the 
law  student   hypothesizes that   the   vile  man 
before him has reflected  a friend, or  the friend 
of a friend.  
    Rethinking   the   problem,   he   comes  to   a 
mysterious   conclusion:    Somewhere   in    the 
world  there is  a man  from  whom  this clarity, 
this  brightness,  emanates;  somewhere in   the 
world   there  is  a  man   who  is  equal  to   this 
brightness.  The law  student resolves to devote 
his life to searching out that man.  
    Thus  we  begin  to   see the   book's  general 
scheme: The  insatiable  search  for  a  soul   by 
means of the delicate glimmerings or reflections 
this  soul has  left  in  others—at first,   the  faint 
trace of a smile or  a word; toward  the last,  the 

188
varied  and growing   splendors  of  intelligence, 
imagination,  and  goodness. The  more  closely 
the men  interrogated  by the  law  student have 
known Al-Mu'tasim,  the greater is their  portion 
of  divinity,   but   the  reader   knows  that  they 
themselves   are   but    mirrors.     A    technical 
mathematical    formula    is    applicable    here: 
Bahadur's   heavily    freighted     novel    is   an 
ascending progression whose final  term  is  the 
sensed or   foreapprehended  "man   called  Al-
Mu'tasim."  The person  immediately  preceding 
Al-Mu'tasim   is  a  Persian  bookseller  of  great 
courtesy and  felicity;   the  man  preceding  the 
bookseller is a saint-----After all those years, the 
law student  comes to  a gallery  "at  the  end of 
which there is  a doorway and a tawdry  curtain 
of  many  beads,  and  behind  that,   a  glowing 
light."  The  law  student  claps his  hands once, 
twice, and  calls out  for  Al-Mu'tasim.   A man's 
voice—the incredible   voice   of  Al-Mu'tasim—
bids  the  law  student  enter.  The  law  student 
draws back the bead curtain  and steps into the 
room. At that point, the novel ends.  
    I  believe  I  am correct  in   saying that  if   an 

189
author is to pull  off such a plot, he is under two 
obligations:  First,  he must  invent  a  variety  of 
prophetic signs; second, he must  not allow  the 
hero  prefigured  by  those  signs  to  become  a 
mere phantasm or  convention.  Bahadur meets 
the first obligation;  I am not sure to what extent 
he meets the second. In  other  words: The  un-
heard and unseen Al-Mu'tasim  should  impress 
us as being a real  person, not  some jumble  of 
vapid superlatives.  In  the  1932 version  of the 
novel, the  supernatural  notes are  few  and far 
between; "the man  called Al-Mu'tasim"  has his 
touch    of    symbolism,     but     he    possesses 
idiosyncratic      personal      traits      as     well. 
Unfortunately,     that    commendable    literary 
practice was not  to  be followed  in  the second 
edition. In  the 1934 version—the edition I  have 
before  me   even  now—the  novel   sinks  into 
allegory: Al-Mu'tasim  is an emblem of God, and 
the detailed itineraries of the hero are somehow 
the progress of the soul in its ascent to mystical 
plenitude. There are distressing details: A black 
Jew from Cochin,  describing Al-Mu'tasim,  says 
that his  skin  is  dark;  a Christian  says that  he 

190
stands upon a tower with his arms  outspread; a 
red lama recalls him  as seated "like that image 
which I  carved from  yak ghee and worshipped 
in   the   monastery   at   Tashilhumpo."    Those 
declarations are an attempt to  suggest a single, 
unitary  God  who  molds   Himself  to   the  dis-
similarities   of  humankind.   In   my  view,  that 
notion is  not particularly  exciting.  I cannot  say 
the same  for  another  idea, however:  the  idea 
that the Almighty  is also in  search of Someone, 
and that  Someone, in search of  a yet superior 
(or  perhaps   simply   necessary, albeit   equal) 
Someone, and so on, to the End—or better yet, 
the    Endlessness—of    Time.     Or     perhaps 
cyclically.  The  etymological   meaning  of  "Al-
Mu'tasim"  (the   name  of  that  eighth  Abbasid 
king who  won  eight  battles, engendered eight 
sons and  eight daughters,  left  eight  thousand 
slaves, and reigned for a period  of eight  years, 
eight moons, and eight days) is "He who goes in 
quest of aid."  In the  1932 version of the  novel, 
the fact  that  the object  of  the pilgrimage  was 
himself a pilgrim  cleverly justified  the difficulty 
of finding Al-Mu'tasim;  in  the 1934 edition, that 

191
fact leads  to  the  extravagant  theology I   have 
described. Mir Bahadur Ali,  as we have seen, is 
incapable  of    resisting   that   basest   of   art's 
temptations: the temptation  to be a genius.  
    I reread  what I have just written  and I  fear I 
have not made sufficiently explicit the virtues  of 
this book.  It  has some quite civilized  features; 
for example, that  argument  in  Chapter XIX  in 
which the  law  student  (and  the reader)  sense 
that one of  the participants   in  the debate  is a 
friend of  Al-Mu'tasim—the man  does not rebut 
another man's sophisms  "in  order not  to  gloat 
at the other man's defeat."  
    It is  generally understood that a modern-day 
book may  honorably  be  based upon  an older 
one, especially since, as Dr. Johnson observed, 
no    man     likes    owing     anything    to     his 
contemporaries.  The  repeated  but   irrelevant 
points  of congruence between  Joyce's Ulysses 
and   Homer's   Odyssey   continue   to    attract 
(though  I   shall   never  understand   why)   the 
dazzled admiration    of  critics.   The  points   of 
congruence between Bahadur's novel and Farîd 
al-dîn  Attar's  classic Conference  of  the  Birds 

192
meet  with   the  no  less  mysterious   praise  of 
London,  and even  of Allahabad  and  Calcutta. 
There are other debts, as well. One investigator 
has documented certain analogies between the 
first scene of the novel and Kipling's story  
    "On  the  City Wall";   Bahadur  acknowledges 
these echoes, but claims that it  would  be most 
unusual if  two  portraits   of  the  tenth  night  of 
Muharram   should  not   agree.... With   greater 
justice,  Eliot   recalls  that   never  once  in   the 
seventy cantos of Spenser's unfinished allegory 
The Faerie  Queene does the heroine  Gloriana 
appear—an omission for which Richard William 
Church had criticized  the work.  I  myself, in all 
humility,   would  point   out  a  distant,  possible 
precursor:  the  Kabbalist  Isaac  Luria,  who   in 
Jerusalem, in   the  sixteenth  century,  revealed 
that  the  soul  of  an  ancestor  or  teacher  may 
enter   into     the   soul    of    an   unhappy    or 
unfortunate  man,  to  comfort  or  instruct   him. 
That type of metempsychosis is called ibbûr. 
    'In  the course of this  article,  I have referred 
to the Manttq  al-tatr,    or  Conference [perhaps 
"Parliament"]    of   the  Birds,   by   the  Persian 

193
mystic     poet    Farïd      al-dïn     Abï     Hämid 
Muhammad  ben Ibrahim   (known  as Attãr,  or 
"perfumer"),  who was murdered by the soldiers 
under Tuluy,   the son  of  Genghis Khan,  when 
Nishapur    was   sacked.   Perhaps   I     should 
summarize  that   poem.  One  of  the   splendid 
feathers of  the  distant  King  of  the  Birds,  the 
Sïmurgh, falls  into  the  center  of China;  other 
birds, weary with  the present  state of anarchy, 
resolve to  find  this  king.  They  know  that  the 
name of  their  king  means "thirty   birds";   they 
know that his palace is in the Mountains  of Kaf, 
the mountains that encircle the earth.  
    The   birds   undertake   the   almost   infinite 
adventure.  They cross  seven wadis   or  seven 
seas; the penultimate of these is called Vertigo; 
the  last,  Annihilation.    Many  of  the   pilgrims 
abandon   the   quest;   others   perish   on   the 
journey.  At  the  end,  thirty   birds,  purified   by 
their travails,  come to  the  mountain  on which 
the Simurgh lives, and they look upon their king 
at last: they  see that they are the  Simurgh and 
that  the  Sïmurgh   is  each, and   all,  of  them. 
(Plotinus, too, in the Enneads [V, 8, 4], remarks 

194
upon a  paradisal extension  of the  principle  of 
identity:  "Everything  in the intelligible   heavens 
is everywhere. Any thing is all things. The sun is 
all stars, and each star is all stars and the sun.") 
The  Manttqal-tair     has  been  translated   into 
French  by  Garcin  de  Tassy, into   English  by 
Edward   FitzGerald;    for   this    note   I    have 
consulted Richard  Burton's  1001 Nights,   Vol. 
X, and  the Margaret  Smith  study entitled   The 
Persian Mystics: Attar  (1932).  
    The  parallels  between  this  poem  and  Mir 
Bahadur   Ali's   novel   are   not   overdone.  In 
Chapter XX, a few words attributed by a Persian 
bookseller  to    Al-Mu'tasim    are   perhaps   an 
expansion of  words  spoken by  the  hero;  that 
and other ambiguous similarities may signal the 
identity  of the seeker and the sought; they may 
also   signal   that    the    sought   has    already 
influenced the seeker. Another chapter suggests 
that  Al-Mu'tasim   is the  "Hindu"   that  the  law 
student thinks he murdered.  